<div class="chapter">
  <h2 class="c008">INTRODUCTION.</h2>
</div>

<p class="c011">The publication of <cite>Brand</cite>, in March 1866, brought
Ibsen fame (in Scandinavia) and relieved him from
the immediate pressure of poverty. Two months later
the Storthing voted him a yearly “poet-pension” of
£90; and with this sum, as he wrote to the Minister
who had been mainly instrumental in furthering his
claim, he felt “his future assured,” so that he could
henceforth “devote himself without hindrance to his
calling.” This first glimpse of worldly prosperity, no
doubt, brought with it the lighter mood which distinguishes
<cite>Peer Gynt</cite> from its predecessor. To call it
the gayest of Ibsen’s works is not, perhaps, to say
very much. Its satire, indeed, is bitter enough; but
it is not the work of an unhappy man. The character
of Peer Gynt, and many of his adventures, are conceived
with unmistakable gusto. Some passages
even bear witness to an exuberance of animal spirits
which reminds one of Ben Jonson’s saying with regard
to Shakespeare—“<span lang="la" xml:lang="la" xml:lang="la">aliquando sufflaminandus erat.</span>”</p>

<p class="c001">The summer of 1866 Ibsen spent at Frascati, in the
Palazzo Gratiosi, where he lived “most comfortably
and cheaply.” He found Frascati and Tusculum
<span class="pageno" id="Page_viii">viii</span>“indescribably delightful.” From the windows of
his study he could see Soracte, “rising isolated and
beautiful from the level of the immense plain ...
the battlefield where the chief engagement in the
world’s history took place.” So he writes in a letter
to Paul Botten-Hansen, and immediately afterwards
proceeds: “I shall soon be setting to work in good
earnest. I am still wrestling with my subject, but I
know that I shall get the upper hand of the brute
before long, and then everything will go smoothly.”
But was the play here referred to <i>Peer Gynt</i>? Perhaps
not. From a letter to his publisher, Hegel,
written three months later, we learn that at that time
he was still turning over several themes in his mind, and
that one of them dealt with the period of Christian IV.
of Denmark. It is in a letter to Hegel, dated from
Rome, January 5, 1867, that we find the first unmistakable
reference to <i>Peer Gynt</i>: “Now I must
tell you that my new work is well under way, and
will, if nothing untoward happens, be finished early
in the summer. It is to be a long dramatic poem,
having as its chief figure one of the Norwegian
peasantry’s half-mythical, fantastic heroes of <i>recent</i>
times. It will bear no resemblance to <i>Brand</i>, contain
no direct polemics and so forth. I have long had the
subject in my thoughts; now the entire plan is worked
out and written down, and the first act begun. The
thing grows as I work at it, and I am certain that you
will be satisfied with it.”</p>

<p class="c001">Two months later (March 8) the poem has “advanced
to the middle of the second act.” On August 8,
he sends to Hegel, from Villa Pisani, Casamicciola,
Ischia, the complete manuscript of the first three acts,
and writes: “I am curious to hear how you like the
poem. I am very hopeful myself. It may interest
<span class="pageno" id="Page_ix">ix</span>you to know that Peer Gynt is a real person, who
lived in Gudbrandsdal, probably at the end of last, or
beginning of this, century; but of his exploits not
much more is known than is to be found in Asbjörnsen’s
<i>Norwegian Fairy Tales</i>, in the section <i>Pictures
from the Mountains</i>. Thus I have not had very much
to build upon; but so much the more liberty has been
left me. It would interest me to know what Clemens
Petersen thinks of the work.” What Clemens Petersen
did think we shall presently learn.</p>

<p class="c001">On October 18 Ibsen despatched from Sorrento the
remainder of his manuscript, and the book was published
on November 14. It has often been pointed
out (by myself among others) as a very remarkable
fact that two such gigantic creations as <i>Brand</i> and
<i>Peer Gynt</i> should have been given to the world in
two successive years; but on examination the marvel
somewhat dwindles. <i>Peer Gynt</i> did not follow so
hot-foot upon <i>Brand</i> as the bare dates of publication
would lead us to suppose. <i>Brand</i> was written in the
summer of 1865, <i>Peer Gynt</i> (as we have seen) in 1867;
so that the poet’s mind had lain fallow for a whole
year (1866) between the two great efforts. It was a
long delay in the publication of <i>Brand</i> that made its
successor seem to tread so close upon its heels.</p>

<p class="c001">One or two other references to the origin of <i>Peer
Gynt</i> may be found in Ibsen’s letters. The most
important occurs in an autobiographical communication
to Peter Hansen, dated Dresden, October 28,
1870: “After <i>Brand</i> came <i>Peer Gynt</i>, as though
of itself. It was written in Southern Italy, in
Ischia and at Sorrento. So far away from one’s
readers one becomes reckless. This poem contains
much that has its origin in the circumstances of my
own youth. My own mother—with the necessary
<span class="pageno" id="Page_x">x</span>exaggerations—served as the model for Ase. (Likewise
for Inga in <i>The Pretenders</i>).” Twelve years
later (1882) Ibsen wrote to George Brandes: “My
father was a merchant with a large business and wide
connections, and he enjoyed dispensing reckless hospitality.
In 1836 he failed, and nothing was left to us
except a farm near the town.... In writing <i>Peer
Gynt</i>, I had the circumstances and memories of my
own childhood before me when I described the life in
the house of ‘the rich Jon Gynt.’”</p>

<p class="c001">Returning to the above-quoted letter to Peter Hansen,
we find this further allusion to <i>Peer Gynt</i>
and its immediate predecessor and successor in the
list of Ibsen’s works: “Environment has great influence
upon the forms in which imagination creates.
May I not, like Christoff in <cite>Jakob von Tyboe</cite>,<a id="r1"></a><a href="#f1" class="c012"><sup>[1]</sup></a> point
to <cite>Brand</cite> and <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>, and say: ‘See, the wine-cup
has done this?’ And is there not something in <cite>The
League of Youth</cite> [written in Dresden] that suggests
<span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">‘Knackwurst und Bier’</span>? Not that I would thereby
imply any inferiority in the latter play.” The transition
to prose was no doubt an inevitable step in the
evolution of Ibsen’s genius; but one wishes he had
kept to the “wine-cup” a little longer.</p>

<p class="c001">A masterpiece is not a flawless work, but one which
has sufficient vitality to live down its faults, until at
last we no longer heed, and almost forget, them. <i>Peer
Gynt</i> had real faults, not a few; and its great merit, as
some of us think—its magnificent, reckless profusion
of fantasy—could not but be bewildering to its first
critics, who had to pronounce upon it before they had
(as Ballested<a id="r2"></a><a href="#f2" class="c012"><sup>[2]</sup></a> would put it) acclimatised themselves
to its atmosphere. It’s reception, then, was much more
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xi">xi</span>dubious than that of <cite>Brand</cite> had been. We find even
George Brandes writing of it: “What great and noble
powers are wasted on this thankless material! Except
in the fourth act, which has no connection with what
goes before and after, and is witless in its satire, crude
in its irony, and in its latter part scarcely comprehensible,
there is almost throughout a wealth of poetry
and a depth of thought such as we do not find, perhaps,
in any of Ibsen’s earlier works.... It would be unjust
to deny that the book contains great beauties, or
that it tells us all, and Norwegians in particular, some
important truths; but beauties and truths are of far
less value than beauty and truth in the singular, and
Ibsen’s poem is neither beautiful nor true. Contempt
for humanity and self-hatred make a bad foundation
on which to build a poetic work. What an unlovely
and distorting view of life this is! What acrid pleasure
can a poet find in thus sullying human nature?”<a id="r3"></a><a href="#f3" class="c012"><sup>[3]</sup></a>
The friendship between Brandes and Ibsen was at this
time just beginning, and—much to Ibsen’s credit—it
appears to have suffered no check by reason of this
outspoken pronouncement.</p>

<p class="c001">On the other hand, he deeply resented a criticism
by Clemens Petersen, who seems to have been at
this time regarded as the æsthetic lawgiver of Copenhagen.
Why he should have done so is not very clear;
for Petersen professed to prefer <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> to <cite>Brand</cite>,
and his criticism on <cite>Brand</cite> Ibsen had apparently accepted
without demur. Most of Petersen’s article is
couched in a very heavy philosophic idiom; but the
following extract, though it refers chiefly to <cite>Brand</cite>,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xii">xii</span>may convey some idea of his general objection to both
poems:—“When a poet, as Ibsen does in <cite>Brand</cite>, depicts
an error, a one-sidedness, which is from first to last presented
in an imposing light, it is not sufficient that he
should eventually, through a piece of sensational symbolism,
let that one-sidedness go to ruin, and it is not
sufficient that in the last word of the drama<a id="r4"></a><a href="#f4" class="c012"><sup>[4]</sup></a> he should
utter the name of that with which the one-sidedness
should have blended in order to become truth. If he
throughout his work shows us this error—in virtue of
its strength, if for no other reason—justifying itself
as against everything that comes in contact with it,
then it is not only in the character depicted that something
is lacking, but in the work of art itself. That
something is the Ideal, without which the work of
art cannot take rank as poetry—the Ideal which here,
as so often in art, lies only in the lighting of the
picture, but which is nevertheless the saving, the uplifting
element. It is to poetry what devotion is to
religion.... In <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>, as in <cite>Brand</cite>, the ideal is
lacking. But this must be said rather less strongly of
<cite>Peer Gynt</cite>. There is more fantasy, more real freedom
of spirit, less strain and less violence in this poem than
in <cite>Brand</cite>.” The critic then speaks of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> as
being “full of riddles which are insoluble, because
there is nothing in them at all.” Peer’s identification
of the Sphinx with the Boyg (Act IV. Sc. 12) he
characterises as “Tankesvindel”—thought-swindling,
or, as we might say, juggling with thought. The
general upshot of his considerations is that <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>
belongs, with Goldschmidt’s <cite>Corsaren</cite>, to the domain
of polemical journalism. It “is not poetry, because
in the transmutation of reality into art it falls half-way
short of the demands both of art and of reality.”</p>

<p class="c001"><span class="pageno" id="Page_xiii">xiii</span>Petersen’s review is noteworthy, not for its own
sake, but for the effect it produced on Ibsen. His
letters to Björnson on the subject are the most vivid
and spontaneous he ever wrote. Björnson happened
to be in Copenhagen when Petersen’s article appeared
in <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Fœdrelandet</cite></span>, and Ibsen seems somehow to have
blamed him for not preventing its appearance. “All
I reproach you with,” he says, “is inaction.” But
Petersen he accuses of lack of “loyalty,” of “an intentional
crime against truth and justice.” “There is
a lie involved in Clemens Petersen’s article, not in what
he says, but in what he refrains from saying. And he
intentionally refrains from saying a great deal....
Tell me, now, is Peer Gynt himself not a personality,
complete and individual? <em>I</em> know that he is. And
the mother; is she not?” But the most memorable
passage in this memorable letter is the following piece
of splendid arrogance: “My book <em>is</em> poetry; and if
it is not, then it will be. The conception of poetry
in our country, in Norway, shall be made to conform
to the book.” It certainly seems that any definition
of poetry which should be so framed as to exclude
<cite>Peer Gynt</cite> must have something of what Petersen himself
called “Tankesvindel” about it.</p>

<p class="c001">Ibsen’s burst of indignation relieved his mind, and
three weeks later we find him writing, half apologetically,
of the “cargo of nonsense” he had “shipped
off” to Björnson, immediately on reading Petersen’s
review. He even sends a friendly “greeting” to the
offending critic. But this is his last (published) letter
to Björnson for something like fifteen years. How
far the reception of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> may have contributed
to the breach between them, I do not know. Björnson’s
own criticism of the poem, as we shall presently
see, was very favourable.</p>

<p class="c001"><span class="pageno" id="Page_xiv">xiv</span><cite>Peer Gynt</cite> was not, on its appearance, quite so popular
as Brand. A second edition was called for in a fortnight;
but the third edition did not appear until 1874,
by which time the seventh edition of <cite>Brand</cite> was
already on the market. Before the end of the century
ten editions of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> had appeared in Copenhagen
as against fourteen of <cite>Brand</cite>. The first German
translation appeared in 1881, and the present English
translation in 1892. A French translation, by Count
Prozor, appeared in the <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><cite>Nouvelle Revue</cite></span> in 1896, but
does not seem to have been published in book form.</p>

<p class="c001">After a great deal of discussion as to the stage-arrangement,
<cite>Peer Gynt</cite>, largely abbreviated, was produced,
with Edvard Grieg’s now famous incidental
music, at the Christiania Theatre in February 1876,
Henrik Klausen playing the title-part. It was acted
thirty-seven times; but a fire which destroyed some
of the scenery put a stop to the performances. In
1892, at the same theatre, the first three acts were
revived, with Björn Björnson as Peer, and repeated fifty
times. In the repertory of the National Theatre, too
(opened in 1899), <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> has taken a prominent
place. It was first given in 1902, and has up to the
present (1906) been performed eighty-four times. In
the version which has established itself on the Norwegian
stage, all five acts are given, but the fourth
and fifth acts are greatly abbreviated. In the season
of 1886 the play was produced at the Dagmar
Theatre, Copenhagen. August Lindberg’s Swedish
Company acted it in Gothenburg in 1892, in Stockholm
in 1895, and afterwards toured with it in
Norway and Sweden. Count Prozor’s translation was
acted by <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">“L’Œuvre”</span> at the Nouveau Théâtre,
Paris, in November, 1896, of which remarkable
production a lively account by Mr. Bernard Shaw
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xv">xv</span>may be found in the <cite>Saturday Review</cite> of that period.
At the <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">Deutsches Volkstheater</span> in Vienna, in May
1902, two performances of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> were given by
the <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">“Akademisch-Litterarische Verein.”</span> I can find
no record of any other German production of the play.
The first production in the English language took
place at the Grand Opera House, Chicago, on October
29, 1906, when Mr. Richard Mansfield appeared as
Peer Gynt. Mr. Mansfield would seem to have acted
the greater part of the play, but to have omitted the
Sæter-Girl scene and the madhouse scene.</p>

<p class="c013">We have seen that the name, Peer Gynt, was suggested
to Ibsen by a folk-tale in Asbjörnsen and Moe’s
invaluable collection. It is one of a group of tales
entitled <cite>Reindeer-Hunting in the Rondë Hills</cite>;<a id="r5"></a><a href="#f5" class="c012"><sup>[5]</sup></a> and in
the same group occurs the adventure of Gudbrand
Glesnë on the Gendin-Edge, which Peer Gynt works
up so unblushingly in Act I. Sc. 1. The text of both
these tales will be found in the Appendix, and the
reader will recognise how very slight are the hints
which set the poet’s imagination to work. The
encounter with the Sæter-Girls (Act II. Sc. 3) and
the struggle with the Boyg (Act II. Sc. 7) are foreshadowed
in Asbjörnsen, and the concluding remark
of Anders Ulsvolden evidently suggested to Ibsen the
idea of incarnating Fantasy in Peer Gynt, as in Brand
he had given us incarnate Will. But the Peer Gynt
of the drama has really nothing in common with the
Peer Gynt of the story, and the rest of the characters
are not even remotely suggested. Many scattered
traits and allusions, however, are borrowed from other
legends in the same storehouse of grotesque and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xvi">xvi</span>marvellous imaginings. Thus the story of the devil in
a nutshell (Act I. Sc. 3) figures in Asbjörnsen under
the title of <cite>The Boy and the Devil</cite>.<a id="r6"></a><a href="#f6" class="c012"><sup>[6]</sup></a> The appearance
of the Green-Clad One with her Ugly Brat, who offers
Peer Gynt a goblet of beer (Act III. Sc. 3), is obviously
suggested by an incident in <cite>Berthe Tuppenhaug’s
Stories</cite>.<a id="r7"></a><a href="#f7" class="c012"><sup>[7]</sup></a> Old Berthe, too, supplies the idea of
correcting Peer Gynt’s eyesight according to the
standard of the hill-trolls (Act II. Sc. 6), as well as
the germ of the fantastic thread-ball episode in the last
Act (Sc. 6). The castle, “East of the Sun and West
of the Moon” (Act III. Sc. 4), gives its title to one
of Asbjörnsen’s stories,<a id="r8"></a><a href="#f8" class="c012"><sup>[8]</sup></a> which may be read in English
in Mr. Andrew Lang’s <cite>Blue Fairy Book</cite>; and “Soria
Moria Castle” is the title of another legend.<a id="r9"></a><a href="#f9" class="c012"><sup>[9]</sup></a> Herr
Passarge (in his <cite>Henrik Ibsen</cite>, Leipzig, 1883) goes so
far as to trace the idea of Peer Gynt’s shrinking from
the casting-ladle, even though hell be the alternative
(Act V. Sc. 7, &amp;c.), to Asbjörnsen’s story of <cite>The
Smith whom they Dared not let into Hell</cite>;<a id="r10"></a><a href="#f10" class="c012"><sup>[10]</sup></a> but the circumstances
are so different, and Ibsen’s idea is such
an inseparable part of the ethical scheme of the drama,
that we can scarcely take it to have been suggested
by this (or any other) individual story.<a id="r11"></a><a href="#f11" class="c012"><sup>[11]</sup></a> At the same
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xvii">xvii</span>time there is no doubt that <cite>The Folk-Lore of Peer
Gynt</cite> might form the subject of a much more extended
study than our space or our knowledge admits of.<a id="r12"></a><a href="#f12" class="c012"><sup>[12]</sup></a>
The whole atmosphere of the first three acts and of
the fifth is that of the Norwegian Folk and Fairy
Tales. It must be remembered, too, that in the early
’sixties Ibsen was commissioned by the Norwegian
Government to visit Romsdal and Söndmöre for the
purpose of collecting folk-songs and legends. To
these journeys, no doubt, we are mainly indebted for
the local colour of <cite>Brand</cite> and <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>.</p>

<p class="c013">What are we to say now of the drift, the interpretation
of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>? The first and most essential
thing may be said in Ibsen’s own words. On February
24, 1868, he wrote from Rome to Frederik Hegel:
“I learn that the book has created much excitement
in Norway. This does not trouble me in the least;
but both there and in Denmark they have discovered
much more satire in it than was intended by me. Why
can they not read the book as a poem? For as such I
wrote it. The satirical passages are tolerably isolated.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xviii">xviii</span>But if the Norwegians of the present time recognise
themselves, as it would appear they do, in the character
of Peer Gynt, that is the good people’s own affair.”
In the last sentence the innocence of intention is,
no doubt, a little overdone; but there is still less
doubt that Ibsen was absolutely sincere in declaring
that he wrote it primarily as a poem, a work of pure
imagination, and that as a work of pure imagination it
ought primarily to be read. There is undeniably an
undercurrent of ethical and satirical meaning in the
play; but no one can properly enjoy or value it who
is not swept along irresistibly by the surface stream
of purely poetic invention and delineation. Peer himself
is a character-creation on the heroic scale, as vital
a personality as Falstaff or Don Quixote. It is here
that the poem (as Clemens Petersen vaguely discerned)
has a marked advantage over its predecessor. In spite
of the tremendous energy with which he is depicted,
Brand remains an abstraction or an attitude, rather
than a human being. But Peer Gynt is human in every
fibre—too human to be alien to any one of us. We
know him, we understand him, we love him—for who
does not love a genial, imaginative, philosophic rascal?
As for his adventures and vicissitudes, if they do not
give us pleasure in and for themselves, quite apart
from any symbolic sub-intention—just as the adventures
of Sindbad, or Gil Blas, or Tom Jones, or Huckleberry
Finn give us pleasure—then assuredly the poem
does not affect us as Ibsen intended that it should.
Readers who approach it for the first time may therefore
be counselled to pay no heed to its ethical or
political meanings, and to take it as it comes, simply
as a dramatic romance or phantasmagoria of purely
human humour and pathos. Reading it in this way,
they will naturally find a good deal that seems obscure
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xix">xix</span>and arbitrary; but much of this will be cleared up on
a second reading, by the aid of such sidelights as this
Introduction can afford. No assiduity of study, however,
can find in <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> a clear, consistent, cut-and-dried
allegory, with a place for everything and everything
in its place. It is not an allegory, but (as aforesaid)
a phantasmagory. This is what the early critics
did not realise. They quarrelled with it for the very
luxuriance of its invention, the buoyant irrepressible
whimsicality of its humour, the shimmering iridescence
of its style. They stood before an “undulant and
diverse” carnival-pageant, and grumbled because it
would not fit into any recognised form, sanctioned by
their preconceived æsthetic principles.</p>

<p class="c001">I am far from maintaining that the reckless, elusive
capriciousness of the poem is an unmixed merit. It
would probably have done no harm if, after the first rapture
of composition had died away, Ibsen had gone over
it and pruned it a little here and there. I can by no
means endorse the critics’ sweeping condemnation of
the fourth act, which contains some of the most delightful
passages in the whole poem; but the first
scene of this act is unquestionably shallow in conception
and diffuse in style—a piece of satiric journalism
rather than of literature. The concluding scenes of
the last act, too, would certainly have been none the
worse of a little compression. The auction scene
(Act V. Sc. 4), though it has a sort of fantastic impressiveness,
seems to me hopelessly baffling in its
relation both to the outward story and to the inner
significance of the poem. Here, and perhaps at some
half-dozen other points, one may admit that Ibsen
appears to have let his fancy run away with him; but
the inert, excessive, or utterly enigmatic passages in
<cite>Peer Gynt</cite> are surely few and brief in comparison with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xx">xx</span>the passages in <cite>Faust</cite> to which the same epithets may
be applied. On the other hand, the scenes of poignant
and thrilling and haunting poetry are too many to be
severally indicated. The first act, with its inimitable
life and movement, Åse’s death-scene, and the Pastor’s
speech in the last act, are usually cited as the culminating
points of the poem; and there can be no doubt
that Åse’s death-scene, at any rate, is one of the
supreme achievements of modern drama.<a id="r13"></a><a href="#f13" class="c012"><sup>[13]</sup></a> But there
are several other scenes that I would place scarcely, if
at all, lower than these. In point of weird intensity,
there is nothing in the poem more marvellous than
the Sæter-Girl scene (Act II. Sc. 3); in point of lyric
movement, Peer Gynt’s repudiation of Ingrid (Act II.
Sc. 1) is incomparable; and in point of sheer beauty
and pathos, Solveig’s arrival at the hut (Act III.
Sc. 3), with the whole of the scene that follows, stands
supreme.<a id="r14"></a><a href="#f14" class="c012"><sup>[14]</sup></a> For my own part, I reckon the shipwreck
scenes at the beginning of the fifth act among the
most impressive, as they are certainly not the least
characteristic, in the poem. And, in enumerating its
traits of undeniable greatness, one must by no means
forget the character of Åse, on which Ibsen himself
dwelt with justified complacency. There is not a more
life-like creation in the whole range of drama.</p>

<p class="c001">Having now warned the reader against allowing the
search for symbolic or satiric meanings to impair his
enjoyment of the pure poetry of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>, I may proceed
to point out some of the implications which do indubitably
underlie the surface aspects of the poem.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxi">xxi</span>These meanings fall under three heads. First, we
have universal-human satire and symbolism, bearing
upon human nature in general, irrespective of race or
nationality. Next we have satire upon Norwegian human
nature in particular, upon the religious and political
life of Norway as a nation. Lastly, we find a certain
number of local and ephemeral references—what, in
the slang of our stage, are called “topical allusions.”</p>

<p class="c001">In order to provide the reader with a clue to the
complex meanings of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>, on its higher lines or
planes of significance, I cannot do better than quote
some paragraphs from the admirable summary of the
drama given by Mr. P. H. Wicksteed in his <cite>Four Lectures
on Henrik Ibsen</cite>.<a id="r15"></a><a href="#f15" class="c012"><sup>[15]</sup></a> Mr. Wicksteed is in such
perfect sympathy with Ibsen in the stage of his development
marked by <cite>Brand</cite> and <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>, that he
has understood these poems, in my judgment, at least
as well as any other commentator, whether German or
Scandinavian. He writes as follows:</p>

<p class="c001">“In <cite>Brand</cite> the hero is an embodied protest against
the poverty of spirit and half-heartedness that Ibsen
rebelled against in his countrymen. In <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> the
hero is himself the embodiment of that spirit. In
<cite>Brand</cite> the fundamental antithesis, upon which, as its
central theme, the drama is constructed, is the contrast
between the spirit of compromise on the one hand, and
the motto ‘everything or nothing’ on the other. And
Peer Gynt is the very incarnation of a compromising
dread of decisive committal to any one course. In
<cite>Brand</cite> the problem of self-realisation and the relation
of the individual to his surroundings is obscurely
struggling for recognition, and in <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> it becomes
the formal theme upon which all the fantastic variations
of the drama are built up. In both plays alike
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxii">xxii</span>the problems of heredity and the influence of early
surroundings are more than touched upon; and both
alike culminate in the doctrine that the only redeeming
power on earth or in heaven is the power of love.</p>

<p class="c001">“Peer Gynt, as already stated, stands for the Norwegian
people, much as they are sketched in <cite>Brand</cite>,
though with more brightness of colouring. Hence his
perpetual ‘hedging’ and determination never so
to commit himself that he cannot draw back. Hence
his fragmentary life of smatterings. Hence his perpetual
brooding over the former grandeur of his
family, his idle dreams of the future, and his neglect
of every present duty. Hence his deep-rooted selfishness
and cynical indifference to all higher motives; and
hence, above all, his sordid and superstitious religion;
for to him religion is the apotheosis of the art of
‘hedging.’</p>

<p class="c001">“But Ibsen’s allegories are never stiffly or pedantically
worked out. His characters, though typical, are
personal. We could read <cite>Brand</cite>, and could feel the
tragedy and learn the lessons of the drama without
any knowledge whatever of the circumstances or
feelings under which it was written, or the references
to the Norwegian character and conduct with which it
teems.</p>

<p class="c001">“So, too, with <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>. We may forget the
national significance of the sketch, except where
special allusions recall it to our minds, and may think
only of the universal problems with which the poem
deals, and which will retain their awful interest when
Ibsen’s polemic against his countrymen has sunk into
oblivion. The study of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> as an occasional
poem should be strictly subsidiary and introductory to
its study as the tragedy of a lost soul.</p>

<p class="c001">“What is it to be one’s self? God <em>meant something</em>
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxiii">xxiii</span>when he made each one of us. For a man to embody
that meaning of God in his words and deeds, and so
become in his degree a ‘word of God made flesh,’ is to
be himself. But thus to be himself he must slay himself.
That is to say, he must slay the craving to make
himself the centre round which others revolve, and
must strive to find his true orbit and swing, self-poised,
round the great central light. But what if a poor
devil can never puzzle out what on earth God <em>did</em>
mean when he made him? Why, then, he must <em>feel</em>
it. But how often your ‘feeling’ misses fire! Ay!
there you have it. The devil has no stauncher ally
than <em>want of perception</em>! [Act V. Sc. 9.]</p>

<p class="c001">“But, after all, you may generally find out what
God meant you for, if you will face facts. It is easy
to find a refuge from facts in lies, in self-deception,
and in self-sufficiency. It is easy to take credit to
yourself for what circumstances have done for you,
and lay upon circumstances what you owe to yourself.
It is easy to think you are realising yourself by refusing
to become a ‘pack-horse for the weal and woe of others’
[Act IV. Sc. 1], keeping alternatives open and never
closing a door behind you or burning your ships, and
so always remaining the master of the situation and
self-possessed. If you choose to do these easy things
you may always ‘get round’ your difficulties [Act II.
Sc. 7], but you will never get through them. You will
remain master of the situation indeed, but the situation
will become poorer and narrower every day. If
you never commit yourself, you never express yourself,
and yourself becomes less and less significant and
decisive. Calculating selfishness is the annihilation of
self.”</p>

<p class="c001">So far Mr. Wicksteed. The general significance of
the poem, in the terms of that theism which may or
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxiv">xxiv</span>may not have been Ibsen’s personal creed during the
years of its incubation, could scarcely be better expounded.</p>

<p class="c001">When we come to subsidiary meanings, we must proceed
more carefully, for we have the poet’s own word
for it that many have been read into the poem whereof
he never dreamt. For example, in his first letter to
Björnson after reading Clemens Petersen’s criticism,
he protested against that critic’s assumption that the
Strange Passenger (Act V. Scs. 1 and 2) was symbolic
of “dread.” “If my head had been on the block,” he
said, “and such an explanation would have saved my life,
it would never have occurred to me. I never thought
of such a thing. I stuck in the scene as a mere
caprice.” For this element of caprice we must always
allow. The whole fourth act, the poet told the
present writer, was an afterthought, and did not belong
to the original scheme of the play.</p>

<p class="c001">Here we come upon the question whether Ibsen
consciously designed <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> as a counterblast to
Björnson’s idyllic peasant-novel, <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Synnöve Solbakken</cite></span>.
This theory, put forward by a judicious French critic,
M. Auguste Ehrhard,<a id="r16"></a><a href="#f16" class="c012"><sup>[16]</sup></a> among others, has always
seemed to me very far-fetched; but as Dr. Brandes,
in the introduction to <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> in the German collected
edition, appears to give it his sanction, I quote
what he says on the point: “German critics have
laid special emphasis on the fact that Ibsen here
placed himself in conscious opposition to Björnson’s
glorification, in his early novels, of the younger generation
of Norwegian peasants. Quarrelsomeness and
love of fighting were represented in Thorbjörn, the
hero of <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Synnöve Solbakken</cite></span>, as traits of the traditional
old-Norse viking spirit; in <cite>Arne</cite> the poetic proclivities
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxv">xxv</span>of the people were placed in an engaging light.
The vaunted fisticuff-heroism was, in Ibsen’s view,
nothing but rawness, and the poetic proclivities of
Norwegian youth appeared to him, in the last analysis,
simply a very prevalent love of lying and gasconading.
The Norwegians appear in the caricaturing mirror of
this brilliant poem as a people who, in smug contentment,
are ‘to themselves enough,’ and therefore laud
everything that is their own, however insignificant it
may be, shrink from all decisive action, and have for
their national vice a tendency to fantastication and
braggadocio.” That <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> is a counterblast to
national romanticism and chauvinism in general there
can of course be no doubt; but I see no reason to suppose
that Ibsen had Björnson’s novels specially in view,
or intended anything like a “caricature” of them. It
is pretty clear, too, that Björnson himself had no such
idea in his mind when he reviewed the poem in the
<span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Norsk Folkeblad</cite></span> for November 23, 1867. His long
article is almost entirely laudatory, and certainly shows
no smallest sign of hostile party-spirit. “<cite>Peer Gynt</cite>,”
says Björnson, “is a satire upon Norwegian egoism,
narrowness, and self-sufficiency, so executed as to have
made me not only again and again laugh till I was
sore, but again and again give thanks to the author in
my heart—as I here do publicly.” Beyond remarking
upon the over-exuberance of detail, and criticising
the versification, Björnson says little or nothing in
dispraise of the poem. On the other hand he says
curiously little of its individual beauties. He never
mentions Åse, says nothing of her death-scene, or
of the Pastor’s speech, and picks out as the best
thing in the play the thread-ball scene (Act V. Sc. 6).</p>

<p class="c001">The most obviously satirical passage of the first
three acts is the scene in the Dovrë-King’s palace
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxvi">xxvi</span>(Act II. Sc. 6), with its jibe at Norwegian national
vanity:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c014">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The cow gives cakes and the bullock mead,</div>
      <div class="line">Ask not if its taste be sour or sweet;</div>
      <div class="line">The main matter is, and you mustn’t forget it,</div>
      <div class="line">It’s all of it home-brewed.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c015">Much more difficult is the interpretation of the Boyg,<a id="r17"></a><a href="#f17" class="c012"><sup>[17]</sup></a>
that vague, shapeless, ubiquitous, inevitable, invulnerable
Thing which Peer encounters in the following
scene (Act II. Sc. 7). Ibsen found it in the folk-tale,
and was attracted, no doubt, by the sheer uncanniness
and eerieness of the idea. Neither can one doubt, however,
that in his own mind he attributed to the monster
some symbolic signification. Dr. Brandes would have
us see in it the Spirit of Compromise—the same evil
spirit which is assailed in <cite>Brand</cite>. The Swedish critic,
Vasenius, interprets it as Peer Gynt’s own consciousness
of his inability to take a decisive step—to go
through an obstacle in place of skirting round it.
Herr Passarge reads in it a symbol of the mass of
mankind, <span lang="la" xml:lang="la" xml:lang="la"><cite>perpetuum immobile</cite></span>, opposing its sheer force
of inertia to every forward movement.<a id="r18"></a><a href="#f18" class="c012"><sup>[18]</sup></a> This would
make it nearly equivalent to “the compact majority”
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxvii">xxvii</span>of <cite>An Enemy of the People</cite>; or, looking at it from a
slightly different angle, we might see in the scene an
illustration in action of that despairing cry of Schiller’s
Talbot: <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">“Mit der Dummheit kämpfen Götter selbst
vergebens.”</span> The truth probably is that the poet
vaguely intended this vague monster to be as elusive
in its symbolism as in its physical constitution. But
when, in Act IV. Sc. 12, he formally identifies the
Boyg with the Sphinx, we may surely conclude that
one of the interpretations present to his mind was
metaphysical. In this aspect, the Boyg would typify
the riddle of existence, with which we grapple in
vain, and which we have to “get round” as best we
can.</p>

<p class="c001">The fourth act contains a good many special allusions,
in addition to the general, and somewhat crude,
satire in the opening scene on the characteristics of
different nationalities, with particular reference to
their conduct in the Dano-German crisis. Peer’s dreams
of African colonisation (Act IV. Sc. 5) are said to refer
to certain projects which Ole Bull had about this time
been ventilating. But it is especially in the madhouse
scene (Act IV. Sc. 13) that satiric sallies abound.
“The Fellah with the royal mummy on his back,”
says Henrik Jæger,<a id="r19"></a><a href="#f19" class="c012"><sup>[19]</sup></a> “is—like Trumpeterstråle—a cut
at the Swedes, the mummy being Charles the Twelfth.
Like the Fellah, it is implied, the Swedes are extremely
proud of their ‘Hero-king,’ and yet during
the Dano-German war they showed not the smallest
sign of having anything in common with him, unless
it were that they, like him, ‘kept still and completely
dead.’ In the delusion of the minister Hussein, who
imagines himself a pen, there is a general reference
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxviii">xxviii</span>to the futile address- and note-mongering which went
on in Norwegian-Swedish officialdom during the Dano-German
War, and a more special one to an eminent
Swedish statesman [Grev Manderström], who, during
the war, had been extremely proud of his official notes,
and had imagined that by means of them he might
exercise a decisive influence on the course of events.”</p>

<p class="c001">Most prominent and unmistakable of all the satiric
passages, however, is the attack on the language-reformers
in the personage of Huhu. In the list of
characters, Huhu is set down as a “Målstræver from
Zanzibar.” Now the Målstrævers are a party which
desires to substitute a language compounded from the
various local dialects, for the Norwegian of the townsfolk
and of literature. This they call Danish, and
declare to be practically a foreign tongue to the
peasants, who form the backbone of the Norwegian
nation. Ibsen’s satire, it must be said, has had little
or no effect on the movement, which has gone on
slowly but steadily, and has of late years met with
official and legislative recognition. There is a large
and increasing literature in the “Mål”; it is taught
in schools and it is spoken in the Storthing. Where
the movement may end it is hard to say. It must
seem to a foreigner, as it seemed to Ibsen, retrograde
and obscurantist; but there is doubtless some genuine
impulse behind it which the foreigner cannot appreciate.</p>

<p class="c013">The principles which have guided us in the following
transcript demand a few words of explanation.
<cite>Peer Gynt</cite> is written from first to last in rhymed verse.
Six or eight different measures are employed in the
various scenes, and the rhymes are exceedingly rich
and complex. The frequency of final light syllables in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxix">xxix</span>Norwegian implies an exceptional abundance of double
rhymes, and Ibsen has taken full advantage of this
peculiarity. In the short first scene of the second
act, for example, twenty-five out of the forty lines
end in double rhymes, and there are three double-rhymed
triplets. The tintinnabulation of these double
rhymes, then, gives to most of the scenes a metrical
character which it might puzzle Mr. Swinburne himself
to reproduce in English. Moreover, the ordinary
objections to rhymed translations seemed to apply
with exceptional force in the case of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>. The
characteristic quality of its style is its vernacular ease
and simplicity. It would have been heart-breaking
work (apart from its extreme difficulty) to substitute
for this racy terseness the conventional graces of
English poetic diction, padding here and perverting
there. To a prose translation, on the other hand, the
objections seemed even greater. It is possible to give
in prose some faint adumbration of epic dignity; but
we had here no epic to deal with. We found (though
the statement may at first seem paradoxical) that the
same vernacular simplicity of style which forbade a
translation in rhyme, was no less hostile to a translation
in prose. The characteristic quality of the
poet’s achievement lay precisely in his having, by the
aid of rhythm and rhyme, transfigured the most easy
and natural dialogue, without the least sacrifice of its
naturalness. Entirely to eliminate these graces of form
would have been to reduce the poem to prose indeed.
It seemed little better than casting a silver statue into
the crucible and asking the world to divine from the
ingot something of the sculptor’s power. A prose
translation, in short, could not but strip Fantasy of its
pinions, rob Satire of its barbs. The poet himself,
moreover, expressly declared that he would rather let
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxx">xxx</span><cite>Peer Gynt</cite> remain untranslated than see it rendered in
prose. After a good deal of reflection and experiment,
we finally suggested to him a middle course between
prose and rhyme: a translation as nearly as possible
in the metres of the original, but with the rhymes
suppressed. To this compromise he assented, and the
following pages are the result.</p>

<p class="c001">We had no precedent—within our knowledge, at any
rate—to guide us, and were forced to lay down our
own laws. Even at the risk of falling between two
stools, we proposed to ourselves a dual purpose. We
sought to produce a translation which should convey
to the general reader some faint conception of the
movement and colour, the wit and pathos, of the
original, and at the same time a transcript which
should serve the student as a “crib” to the Norwegian
text. This, then, the reader must be good enough to
bear in mind: that the following version is designed
to facilitate, not to supersede, the study of the original.
But, apart from our desire to provide a “crib” to
<cite>Peer Gynt</cite>, we felt that, in taking the liberty of suppressing
the rhymes, we abjured our right to any
other liberty whatsoever. A rhymed paraphrase of a
great poem may have a beauty of its own; an unrhymed
version must be no paraphrase, but a faithful
transcript, else “the ripple of laughing rhyme” has
been sacrificed in vain. Our fundamental principle
then, has been to represent the original <em>line for line</em>;
and to this principle we have adhered with the utmost
fidelity. There are probably not fifty cases in the
whole poem in which a word has been transferred from
one line to another, and then only some pronoun or
auxiliary verb. It is needless to say that in adhering
to this principle we have often had to resist temptation.
Many cases presented themselves in which
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxxi">xxxi</span>greater clearness, grace, and vigour might easily have
been attained by transferring a word or phrase from
this line to that, or even altering the sequence of a
whole group of lines. In no case have we yielded to
such temptation, feeling that, our rule once relaxed,
we should insensibly but inevitably lapse into mere
paraphrase. Temptation beset us with especial force
in the less vital passages of the poem. In these places
it would have been easy to give our rendering some
approach to grace and point by disregarding inversions
and other defects of expression, justified in the original
by the wit and spirit of the rhymes, but of course deprived
in our transcript of any such excuse. Here, as
elsewhere, we were proof against temptation; it is
for our readers to decide whether our constancy was
heroic or pedantic.</p>

<p class="c001">It would be folly to pretend either that we have reproduced
every word of the original, or that we have
avoided all necessity for “padding.” The chief drawback
of our line-for-line principle is that it has
debarred us from eking out the deficiency of one line
with the superfluity of the next. We trust, however,
that few essential ideas, or even words, of the original
will be found quite unaccounted for; while with regard
to padding, we have tried, where we found it absolutely
forced upon us, to use only such mechanical
parts of speech as introduced no new idea into the
context. We have found by experiment that the fact
of writing in measure has frequently enabled us to
keep much closer to the original than would have been
possible in prose. This is not in reality so strange as
it may at first sight appear. A prose translation of
verse can avoid paraphrase only at the cost of grotesque
inelegance; whereas in rendering metre into
metre, we are working under the same laws which
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxxii">xxxii</span>govern the original, and are therefore enabled in many
cases to adopt identical forms of expression, which
would be quite inadmissible in prose.</p>

<p class="c001">Thirty out of the thirty-eight scenes into which the
five acts are divided are written almost entirely in an
irregular measure of four accents, evidently designed
to give the greatest possible variety and suppleness to
the dialogue. The four accents constitute almost the
only assignable law of this measure, the feet being of
any length, from two to four syllables, and of all possible
denominations—iambics, trochees, dactyls, anapæsts,
amphibrachs. The effect is at first rather
baffling to the unaccustomed ear; but when one gets
into the swing of the rub-a-dub rhythm, if we may
venture to call it so, the feeling of ruggedness
vanishes, and the verse is found to be capable of
poignantly pathetic, as well as of buoyantly humorous,
expression.</p>

<p class="c001">We have not attempted to reproduce each line
of this measure accurately, foot for foot, holding it
enough to observe the law of the four accents. Where
the four-accent rule is obviously departed from, it will
generally be found to be in obedience to the original;
for Ibsen now and then (but very rarely) introduces a
line or couplet of three or of five accents.</p>

<p class="c001">Of the eight scenes in which this measure is not employed,
three—Act I. Sc. 1, Act II. Sc. 1, and Act IV. Sc. 7—are
in a perfectly regular trochaic measure of
four accents, the lines containing seven or eight syllables,
according as the rhymes are single or double. In
dealing with this measure, we have not thought it
necessary to follow the precise arrangement of the
original in the alternation of seven and eight syllable
lines. In other words, we have sometimes represented
a seven-syllable line by one of eight syllables, an eight-syllable
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxxiii">xxxiii</span>line by one of seven. In the short first scene
of the second act, however, every line represents accurately
the length of the corresponding line in the
original.</p>

<p class="c001">The fourth scene of Act II. is written in lines of
three accents; the last scene of the third act—Åse’s
death-scene—in lines of three accents with alternate
double and single rhymes. In rendering this scene,
we have been careful to preserve the alternation of
strong with light endings, which gives it its metrical
character.</p>

<p class="c001">Two scenes—Act IV. Sc. I, and Act V. Sc. 2—consist
of four-accent iambic lines, differing from the
octosyllabic verse of <cite>Marmion</cite> or <cite>The Giaour</cite> chiefly in
the greater prevalence of double and even treble
rhymes. Finally, the sixth scene of Act V. consists
mainly of eight-line lyrical stanzas, with two accents
in each line, Peer Gynt’s interspersed remarks being
in trochaic verses, like those of Act I. Sc. 1. In such
intercalated passages, so to speak, as the rhapsodies of
Huhu and the Fellah in Act IV. Sc. 13, and the
Pastor’s speech at the grave in Act V. Sc. 3, we have
accurately reproduced the measures of the original.
The Pastor’s speech is the only passage in the whole
poem which is couched in iambic decasyllables.</p>

<p class="c001">In dealing with idioms and proverbial expressions,
our practice has not been very consistent. We have
sometimes, where they seemed peculiarly racy and
expressive, translated them literally; in other cases we
have had recourse to the nearest English equivalent,
even where the metaphor employed is quite different.
In the latter instances we have usually given the literal
rendering of the phrase in a footnote.</p>

<p class="c001">For the present edition the text has been carefully
revised, and some rough edges have, it is hoped, been
<span class="pageno" id="Page_xxxiv">xxxiv</span>smoothed away; but no very essential alteration has
been made. While we are keenly conscious of all that
the poem loses in our rendering, we cannot but feel
that it has justified its existence, inasmuch as it has
brought home to thousands of readers on both sides
of the Atlantic a not wholly inadequate sense of the
greatness of the original.</p>

<div class="c016">W. A.</div>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f1">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r1">1</a>. One of Holberg’s most famous comedies.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f2">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r2">2</a>. See <cite>The Lady from the Sea</cite>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f3">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r3">3</a>. Brandes: <cite>Ibsen and Björnson</cite>, p. 35. London, Heinemann,
1899. Except in regard to the fourth act, Dr. Brandes has, in
the introduction to <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> in the German collected edition,
recanted his early condemnation of the poem.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f4">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r4">4</a>. The last words are “<span lang="la" xml:lang="la" xml:lang="la">deus caritatis.</span>”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f5">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r5">5</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Norske Huldre-Eventyr og Folkesagn</cite></span>, Christiania, 1848,
p. 47. See also Copenhagen edition, 1896, p. 163.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f6">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r6">6</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Norske Folke-og Huldre-Eventyr</cite></span>, Copenhagen, 1896, p. 48.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f7">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r7">7</a>. <i>Ibid.</i>, p. 129.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f8">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r8">8</a>. <i>Ibid.</i>, p. 259.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f9">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r9">9</a>. Not included in the Copenhagen edition. See edition,
Christiania, 1866, p. 115. See also Sir George Webbe Dasent’s
<cite>Popular Tales from the Norse</cite>, Edinburgh, 1859; new ed. 1903,
p. 396. More or less representative selections from the storehouse
of Asbjörnsen and Moe may also be found in <cite>Tales from
the Fjeld</cite>, by G. W. Dasent, London, 1874, and in <cite>Round the
Yule Log</cite>, by H. L. Brækstad, London 1881.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f10">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r10">10</a>. Copenhagen ed. 1896, p. 148.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f11">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r11">11</a>. In this story, however, he probably found the suggestion of
the “cross-roads” which figure so largely in the fifth act. In
Asbjörnsen, they are explicitly stated to be the point where the
ways to Heaven and Hell diverge.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f12">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r12">12</a>. Further gleanings of legendary lore concerning Peer Gynt
may be found in the Norwegian periodical <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Syn og Segn</cite></span>, 1903,
pp. 119-130. The writer, Per Aasmundstad, is of opinion that
Peer Gynt’s real name was Peer Haagaa (the owner of Haagaa
farm) and that Gynt was either a name given him by the huldra-folk,
or else a local nickname for humorists of his kind. According
to this authority, he probably lived as far back as the seventeenth
century. Per Aasmundstad’s article is written in the local
dialect, with such ruthless phonetic accuracy that I read it with
difficulty; but he does not seem to have discovered anything that
has a definite bearing on Ibsen’s work. From the wording of
Ibsen’s letters to Hegel, however (p. viii), it would seem that he
had some knowledge of the Gynt legend over and above what
was to be found in Asbjörnsen. (For access to <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Syn og Segn</cite></span>,
and for other obliging assistance, I am indebted to Herr Halvdan
Koht, the author of the excellent biographical introduction to
Ibsen’s Letters.)</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f13">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r13">13</a>. It is pretty clear that the poet designed Åse’s death as a
deliberate contrast to the death of Brand’s mother.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f14">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r14">14</a>. In all these remarks I have in mind, of course, the scenes in
their original form. The reader will easily understand the loss
which they inevitably suffer in being deprived of the crowning
grace of richly-elaborated rhyme.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f15">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r15">15</a>. London: Sonnenschein, 1892.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f16">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r16">16</a>. <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><cite>Henrik Ibsen et le Théâtre Contemporain.</cite></span> Paris, 1892.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f17">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r17">17</a>. Deeming it unnecessary to trouble our readers with niceties
of pronunciation, we have represented the “Böig” of the
original by the more easily pronounceable “Boyg.” The root-idea
seems to be that of bending, of sinuousness; compare
Norwegian <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><i>böie</i></span>, German <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de"><i>biegen</i></span>, to bend. In Aasmundstad’s version
of the <cite>Peer Gynt</cite> legends (see Note, p. <a href="#f12">xvii</a>) when the Boyg
names itself, Peer answers <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Antel du æ rak hell bògjë, saa fæ du
sleppe mé fram”</span>—“Whether you are straight or crooked,
you must let me pass.” The German translator, both in the
folk-tale and in the drama, renders <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Böigen”</span> by <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">“der
Krumme.”</span> So far as we are aware, the name occurs in no
other folk-tale save that of <cite>Peer Gynt</cite>. It is not generic, but
denotes an individual troll-monster.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f18">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r18">18</a>. Dr. A. von Hanstein (<span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de"><cite>Ibsen als Idealist</cite></span>, Leipzig, 1897, p. 67),
states that Ibsen himself endorsed this interpretation; but I do
not know on what evidence his statement is founded.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f19">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r19">19</a>. <cite>Henrik Ibsen</cite> 1828-1888. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Et Literært Livsbillede</cite></span>, Copenhagen,
1888. English Translation, London, Heinemann, 1890.</p>
</div>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c000" />
</div>
<div><span class="pageno" id="Page_1">1</span></div>
<div class="playbody">

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div><span class="xlarge">PEER GYNT</span></div>
    <div class="c000"><span class="large">(1867)</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_2">2</span>
  <h2 class="c008">CHARACTERS.</h2>
</div>

 <ul class="ul_1 c019">
    <li><span class="sc">Åse</span>,<a id="r20"></a><a href="#f20" style="text-decoration:&#10;    none; "><sup>[20]</sup></a> <i>a peasant’s widow</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>,<a id="r21"></a><a href="#f21" class="c012"><sup>[21]</sup></a> <i>her son</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Two Old Women</span> <i>with corn-sacks</i>. <span class="sc">Aslak</span>, <i>a smith</i>. <span class="sc">Wedding Guests.</span> <span class="sc">A Kitchen-Master</span>, <span class="sc">A Fiddler</span>, <span class="fss">ETC.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">A Man and Wife</span>, <i>newcomers to the district</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Solveig</span> and <span class="sc">Little Helga</span>, <i>their
    daughters</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">The Farmer at Hegstad.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Ingrid</span>, <i>his daughter</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">The Bridegroom</span> and <span class="sc">His Parents</span>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Three Sæter-Girls.</span> <span class="sc">A Green-Clad Woman.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">The Old Man of the Dovrë.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">A Troll-Courtier.</span>  <span class="sc">Several Others.</span>
    <span class="sc">Troll-Maidens</span> and <span class="sc">Troll-Urchins</span>. <span class="sc">A Couple of Witches.</span> <span class="sc">Brownies</span>, <span class="sc">Nixies</span>, <span class="sc">Gnomes</span>, <span class="fss">ETC.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">An Ugly Brat.</span> <span class="sc">A Voice in the
    Darkness.</span> <span class="sc">Bird-Cries.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Kari</span>, <i>a cottar’s wife</i>.
    </li>
    <li>Master <span class="sc">Cotton</span>, Monsieur <span class="sc">Ballon</span>,
    Herren <span class="sc">Von Eberkopf</span> and <span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle</span>,
    <i>gentlemen on their travels</i>. <span class="sc">A Thief</span> and <span class="sc">A
    Receiver</span>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Anitra</span>, <i>daughter of a Bedouin chief</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Arabs</span>, <span class="sc">Female Slaves</span>, <span class="sc">Dancing-Girls</span>, <span class="fss">ETC.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">The Memnon-Statue</span> (<i>singing</i>). <span class="sc">The
    Sphinx At Gizeh</span> (<i>muta persona</i>).
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Professor Begriffenfeldt</span>, Dr. phil., <i>director of the
    madhouse at Cairo</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Huhu</span>, <i>a language-reformer from the coast of Malabar</i>.
    <span class="sc">Hussein</span>, <i>an eastern Minister</i>. <span class="sc">A
    Fellah</span>, <i>with a royal mummy</i>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">Several Madmen</span>, <i>with their</i> <span class="sc">Keepers</span>.
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">A Norwegian Skipper</span> and <span class="sc">His Crew</span>.
    <span class="sc">A Strange Passenger.</span>
    </li>
    <li><span class="sc">A Pastor.</span> <span class="sc">A Funeral-Party.</span> <span class="sc">A Parish-Officer.</span> <span class="sc">A Button-Moulder.</span> <span class="sc">A Lean Person.</span>
    </li>
  </ul>

<p class="c001">(<i>The action, which opens in the beginning of the present
[that is the nineteenth] century, and ends towards our own
days [1867], takes place partly in Gudbrandsdale, and on
the mountains around it, partly on the coast of Morocco, in
the desert of Sahara, in a madhouse at Cairo, at sea, etc.</i>)</p>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f20">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r20">20</a>. Pronounce <i>Oasë</i>. The letter <i>å</i> is pronounced like the <i>o</i> in
“home.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f21">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r21">21</a>. Pronounce <i>Pair Günt</i>—the <i>G</i> hard, the <i>y</i> like the German
modified <i>ü</i>.</p>
</div>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c000" />
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_3">3</span><span class="xlarge">PEER GYNT.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<hr class="c020" />

<div class="chapter">
  <h2 class="c008">ACT FIRST.</h2>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FIRST.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>A wooded hillside near <span class="sc">Åse’s</span> farm. A river rushes
down the slope. On the farther side of it an old
mill-shed. It is a hot day in summer.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>, a strongly-built youth of twenty, comes
down the pathway. His mother, <span class="sc">Åse</span>, a small,
slightly-built woman, follows him, scolding angrily.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c019">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer, you’re lying!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Without stopping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">No, I am not!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well then, swear that it is true!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Swear? Why should I?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">See, you dare not!</div>
      <div class="line">It’s a lie from first to last.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_4">4</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stopping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It is true—each blessed word!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Confronting him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Don’t you blush before your mother?</div>
      <div class="line">First you skulk among the mountains</div>
      <div class="line">Monthlong in the busiest season,</div>
      <div class="line">Stalking reindeer in the snows;</div>
      <div class="line">Home you come then, torn and tattered,</div>
      <div class="line">Gun amissing, likewise game;—</div>
      <div class="line">And at last, with open eyes,</div>
      <div class="line">Think to get me to believe</div>
      <div class="line">All the wildest hunters’-lies!—</div>
      <div class="line">Well, where did you find the buck, then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">West near Gendin.<a id="r22"></a><a href="#f22" class="c012"><sup>[22]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Laughing scornfully.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Ah! Indeed.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Keen the blast towards me swept;</div>
      <div class="line">Hidden by an alder-clump,</div>
      <div class="line">He was scraping in the snow-crust</div>
      <div class="line">After lichen——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>As before.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Doubtless, yes!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Breathlessly I stood and listened,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_5">5</span>Heard the crunching of his hoof,</div>
      <div class="line">Saw the branches of one antler.</div>
      <div class="line">Softly then among the boulders</div>
      <div class="line">I crept forward on my belly.</div>
      <div class="line">Crouched in the moraine I peered up;—</div>
      <div class="line">Such a buck, so sleek and fat,</div>
      <div class="line">You, I’m sure, have ne’er set eyes on.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, of course not!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Bang! I fired.</div>
      <div class="line">Clean he dropped upon the hillside.</div>
      <div class="line">But the instant that he fell,</div>
      <div class="line">I sat firm astride his back,</div>
      <div class="line">Gripped him by the left ear tightly,</div>
      <div class="line">And had almost sunk my knife-blade</div>
      <div class="line">In his neck, behind his skull—</div>
      <div class="line">When, behold! the brute screamed wildly.</div>
      <div class="line">Sprang upon his feet like lightning,</div>
      <div class="line">With a back-cast of his head</div>
      <div class="line">From my fist made knife and sheath fly,</div>
      <div class="line">Pinned me tightly by the thigh,</div>
      <div class="line">Jammed his horns against my legs,</div>
      <div class="line">Clenched me like a pair of tongs;—</div>
      <div class="line">Then forthwith away he flew</div>
      <div class="line">Right along the Gendin-Edge!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Involuntarily.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Jesus save us——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Have you ever</div>
      <div class="line">Chanced to see the Gendin-Edge?</div>
      <div class="line">Nigh on four miles long it stretches</div>
      <div class="line">Sharp before you like a scythe.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_6">6</span>Down o’er glaciers, landslips, screes,</div>
      <div class="line">Down the toppling grey moraines,</div>
      <div class="line">You can see, both right and left,</div>
      <div class="line">Straight into the tarns that slumber,</div>
      <div class="line">Black and sluggish, more than seven</div>
      <div class="line">Hundred fathoms deep below you.</div>
      <div class="line in4">Right along the Edge we two</div>
      <div class="line">Clove our passage through the air.</div>
      <div class="line in4">Never rode I such a colt!</div>
      <div class="line">Straight before us as we rushed</div>
      <div class="line">’Twas as though there glittered suns.</div>
      <div class="line">Brown-backed eagles that were sailing</div>
      <div class="line">In the wide and dizzy void</div>
      <div class="line">Half-way ’twixt us and the tarns,</div>
      <div class="line">Dropped behind, like motes in air.</div>
      <div class="line in4">On the shores crashed hurtling ice-floes,</div>
      <div class="line">But no echo reached my ears.</div>
      <div class="line">Only sprites of dizziness<a id="r23"></a><a href="#f23" class="c012"><sup>[23]</sup></a> sprang,</div>
      <div class="line">Dancing, round;—they sang, they swung,</div>
      <div class="line">Circle-wise, past sight and hearing!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Dizzy.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, God save me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">All at once,</div>
      <div class="line">At a desperate, break-neck spot,</div>
      <div class="line">Rose a great cock-ptarmigan,</div>
      <div class="line">Flapping, cackling, terrified,</div>
      <div class="line">From the crack where he lay hidden</div>
      <div class="line">At the buck’s feet on the Edge.</div>
      <div class="line in4">Then the buck shied half around,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_7">7</span>Leapt sky-high, and down we plunged,</div>
      <div class="line">Both of us, into the depths!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">Åse</span> totters, and catches at the trunk of a
tree. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> continues</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in4">Mountain walls behind us, black,</div>
      <div class="line">And below a void unfathomed!</div>
      <div class="line in4">First we clove through banks of mist,</div>
      <div class="line">Then we clove a flock of sea-gulls,</div>
      <div class="line">So that they, in mid-air startled,</div>
      <div class="line">Flew in all directions, screaming.</div>
      <div class="line in4">Downward rushed we, ever downward.</div>
      <div class="line">But beneath us something shimmered,</div>
      <div class="line">Whitish, like a reindeer’s belly.—</div>
      <div class="line">Mother, ’twas our own reflection</div>
      <div class="line">In the glass-smooth mountain tarn,</div>
      <div class="line">Shooting up towards the surface</div>
      <div class="line">With the same wild rush of speed</div>
      <div class="line">Wherewith we were shooting downwards.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Gasping for breath.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer! God help me——! Quickly, tell——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Buck from over, buck from under,</div>
      <div class="line">In a moment clashed together,</div>
      <div class="line">Scattering foam-flecks all around.</div>
      <div class="line in4">There we lay then, floating, plashing,—</div>
      <div class="line">But at last we made our way</div>
      <div class="line">Somehow to the northern shore;</div>
      <div class="line">Swam the buck, I clung behind him:—</div>
      <div class="line">I ran homewards——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">But the buck, dear?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_8">8</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He’s there still, for aught I know;—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Snaps his fingers, turns on his heel, and
adds</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Catch him, and you’re welcome to him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And your neck you haven’t broken?</div>
      <div class="line">Haven’t broken both your thighs?</div>
      <div class="line">And your backbone, too, is whole?</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, dear Lord—what thanks, what praise,</div>
      <div class="line">Should be thine who helped my boy!</div>
      <div class="line">There’s a rent, though, in your breeches;</div>
      <div class="line">But it’s scarce worth talking of</div>
      <div class="line">When one thinks what dreadful things</div>
      <div class="line">Might have come of such a leap——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Stops suddenly, looks at him open-mouthed
and wide-eyed; cannot find words for
some time, but at last bursts out</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, you devil’s story-teller,</div>
      <div class="line">Cross of Christ, how you can lie!</div>
      <div class="line">All this screed you foist upon me,</div>
      <div class="line">I remember now, I knew it</div>
      <div class="line">When I was a girl of twenty.</div>
      <div class="line">Gudbrand Glesnë<a id="r24"></a><a href="#f24" class="c012"><sup>[24]</sup></a> it befell,</div>
      <div class="line">Never you, you——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Me as well.</div>
      <div class="line">Such a thing can happen twice.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Exasperated.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, a lie, turned topsy-turvy,</div>
      <div class="line">Can be prinked and tinselled out,</div>
      <div class="line">Decked in plumage new and fine,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_9">9</span>Till none knows its lean old carcass.</div>
      <div class="line">That is just what you’ve been doing,</div>
      <div class="line">Vamping up things, wild and grand,</div>
      <div class="line">Garnishing with eagles’ backs</div>
      <div class="line">And with all the other horrors,</div>
      <div class="line">Lying right and lying left,</div>
      <div class="line">Filling me with speechless dread,</div>
      <div class="line">Till at last I recognised not</div>
      <div class="line">What of old I’d heard and known!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If another talked like that</div>
      <div class="line">I’d half kill him for his pains.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Weeping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, would God I lay a corpse;</div>
      <div class="line">Would the black earth held me sleeping.</div>
      <div class="line">Prayers and tears don’t bite upon him.—</div>
      <div class="line">Peer, you’re lost, and ever will be!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Darling, pretty little mother,</div>
      <div class="line">You are right in every word;—</div>
      <div class="line">Don’t be cross, be happy——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Silence!</div>
      <div class="line">Could I, if I would, be happy,</div>
      <div class="line">With a pig like you for son?</div>
      <div class="line">Think how bitter I must find it,</div>
      <div class="line">I, a poor defenceless widow,</div>
      <div class="line">Ever to be put to shame!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Weeping again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">How much have we now remaining</div>
      <div class="line">From your grandsire’s days of glory?</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_10">10</span>Where are now the sacks<a id="r25"></a><a href="#f25" class="c012"><sup>[25]</sup></a> of coin</div>
      <div class="line">Left behind by Rasmus Gynt?</div>
      <div class="line">Ah, your father lent them wings,—</div>
      <div class="line">Lavished them abroad like sand,</div>
      <div class="line">Buying land in every parish,</div>
      <div class="line">Driving round in gilded chariots.</div>
      <div class="line">Where is all the wealth he wasted</div>
      <div class="line">At the famous winter-banquet,</div>
      <div class="line">When each guest sent glass and bottle</div>
      <div class="line">Shivering ’gainst the wall behind him?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Where’s the snow of yester-year?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Silence, boy, before your mother!</div>
      <div class="line">See the farmhouse! Every second</div>
      <div class="line">Window-pane is stopped with clouts.</div>
      <div class="line">Hedges, fences, all are down,</div>
      <div class="line">Beasts exposed to wind and weather,</div>
      <div class="line">Fields and meadows lying fallow,</div>
      <div class="line">Every month a new distraint——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come now, stop this old-wife’s talk!</div>
      <div class="line">Many a time has luck seemed drooping,</div>
      <div class="line">And sprung up as high as ever!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Salt strewn is the soil it grew from.</div>
      <div class="line">Lord, but you’re a rare one, you,—</div>
      <div class="line">Just as pert and jaunty still,</div>
      <div class="line">Just as bold as when the Pastor,</div>
      <div class="line">Newly come from Copenhagen,</div>
      <div class="line">Bade you tell your Christian name,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_11">11</span>And declared that such a headpiece</div>
      <div class="line">Many a Prince down there might envy;</div>
      <div class="line">Till the cob your father gave him,</div>
      <div class="line">With a sledge to boot, in thanks</div>
      <div class="line">For his pleasant, friendly talk.—</div>
      <div class="line">Ah, but things went bravely then!</div>
      <div class="line">Provost,<a id="r26"></a><a href="#f26" class="c012"><sup>[26]</sup></a> Captain, all the rest,</div>
      <div class="line">Dropped in daily, ate and drank,</div>
      <div class="line">Swilling, till they well-nigh burst.</div>
      <div class="line">But ’tis need that tests one’s neighbour.</div>
      <div class="line">Lonely here it grew, and silent,</div>
      <div class="line">From the day that “Gold-bag Jon”<a id="r27"></a><a href="#f27" class="c012"><sup>[27]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Started with his pack, a pedlar.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Dries her eyes with her apron.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Ah, you’re big and strong enough,</div>
      <div class="line">You should be a staff and pillar</div>
      <div class="line">For your mother’s frail old age,—</div>
      <div class="line">You should keep the farm-work going,</div>
      <div class="line">Guard the remnants of your gear;—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Crying again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Oh, God help me, small’s the profit</div>
      <div class="line">You have been to me, you scamp!</div>
      <div class="line">Lounging by the hearth at home,</div>
      <div class="line">Grubbing in the charcoal embers;</div>
      <div class="line">Or, round all the country, frightening</div>
      <div class="line">Girls away from merry-makings—</div>
      <div class="line">Shaming me in all directions,</div>
      <div class="line">Fighting with the worst rapscallions——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Turning away from her.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let me be.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_12">12</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Following him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Can you deny</div>
      <div class="line">That you were the foremost brawler</div>
      <div class="line">In the mighty battle royal</div>
      <div class="line">Fought the other day at Lundë;</div>
      <div class="line">When you raged like mongrels mad?</div>
      <div class="line">Who was it but you that broke</div>
      <div class="line">Blacksmith Aslak’s arm for him,—</div>
      <div class="line">Or at any rate that wrenched one</div>
      <div class="line">Of his fingers out of joint?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who has filled you with such prate?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hotly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Cottar Kari heard the yells!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Rubbing his elbow.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Maybe, but ’twas I that howled.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in5">Yes, mother,—<i>I</i> got beaten.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What d’you say?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">He’s limber, he is.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_13">13</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in5">Why Aslak, to be sure.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Shame—and shame; I spit upon you!</div>
      <div class="line">Such a worthless sot as that,</div>
      <div class="line">Such a brawler, such a sodden</div>
      <div class="line">Dram-sponge to have beaten you!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Weeping again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Many a shame and slight I’ve suffered;</div>
      <div class="line">But that this should come to pass</div>
      <div class="line">Is the worst disgrace of all.</div>
      <div class="line">What if he be ne’er so limber,</div>
      <div class="line">Need you therefore be a weakling?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Though I hammer or am hammered,—</div>
      <div class="line">Still we must have lamentations.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Laughing</i></div>
      <div class="line">Cheer up, mother——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">What? You’re lying</div>
      <div class="line">Now again?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Yes, just this once.</div>
      <div class="line">Come now, wipe your tears away;—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Clenching his left hand.</i></div>
      <div class="line">See,—with this same pair of tongs,</div>
      <div class="line">Thus I held the smith bent double,</div>
      <div class="line">While my sledge-hammer right fist——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, you brawler! You will bring me</div>
      <div class="line">With your doings to the grave!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_14">14</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, you’re worth a better fate;</div>
      <div class="line">Better twenty thousand times!</div>
      <div class="line">Little, ugly, dear old mother,</div>
      <div class="line">You may safely trust my word,—</div>
      <div class="line">All the parish shall exalt you;</div>
      <div class="line">Only wait till I have done</div>
      <div class="line">Something—something really <a id="corr14.8"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="grand">grand.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_14.8"><ins class="correction" title="grand">grand.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Contemptuously.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in5">Who knows what may befall <a id="corr14.13"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="one">one?</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_14.13"><ins class="correction" title="one">one?</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Could you but find so much sense,</div>
      <div class="line">One day, as to do the darning</div>
      <div class="line">Of your breeches for yourself!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hotly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I will be a king, a kaiser!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, God comfort me, he’s losing</div>
      <div class="line">All the little wits he’d left!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, I will! Just give me time!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Give you time, you’ll be a prince,</div>
      <div class="line">So the saying goes, I think!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You shall see!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_15">15</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">Oh, hold your tongue</div>
      <div class="line">You’re as mad as mad can be.—</div>
      <div class="line in4">Ah, and yet it’s true enough,—</div>
      <div class="line">Something might have come of you,</div>
      <div class="line">Had you not been steeped for ever</div>
      <div class="line">In your lies and trash and moonshine.</div>
      <div class="line">Hegstad’s girl was fond of you.</div>
      <div class="line">Easily you could have won her</div>
      <div class="line">Had you wooed her with a will——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Could I?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">The old man’s too feeble</div>
      <div class="line">Not to give his child her way.</div>
      <div class="line">He is stiff-necked in a fashion;</div>
      <div class="line">But at last ’tis Ingrid rules;</div>
      <div class="line">And where she leads, step by step</div>
      <div class="line">Stumps the gaffer, grumbling, after.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Begins to cry again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Ah, my Peer!—a golden girl—</div>
      <div class="line">Land entailed on her! Just think,</div>
      <div class="line">Had you set your mind upon it,</div>
      <div class="line">You’d be now a bridegroom brave,—</div>
      <div class="line">You that stand here grimed and tattered!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Briskly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come, we’ll go a-wooing then!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Where?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in7">At Hegstad!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_16">16</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Ah, poor boy;</div>
      <div class="line">Hegstad way is barred to wooers!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How is that?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Ah, woe is me!</div>
      <div class="line">Lost the moment, lost the luck——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Speak!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Sobbing</i>.</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in7">While in the Wester-hills</div>
      <div class="line">You in air were riding reindeer,</div>
      <div class="line">Here Mads Moen’s<a id="r28"></a><a href="#f28" class="c012"><sup>[28]</sup></a> won the girl!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What! That women’s-bugbear! He——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, she’s taking him for husband.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Wait you here till I have harnessed</div>
      <div class="line">Horse and waggon——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Going.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Spare your pains,</div>
      <div class="line">They are to be wed to-morrow——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Pooh; this evening I’ll be there!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_17">17</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Fie now! Would you crown our miseries</div>
      <div class="line">With a load of all men’s scorn?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Never fear; ’twill all go well.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Shouting and laughing at the same time.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Mother, jump! We’ll spare the waggon;</div>
      <div class="line">’Twould take time to fetch the mare up——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Lifts her up in his arms.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Put me down!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">No, in my arms</div>
      <div class="line">I will bear you to the wedding!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Wades out into the stream.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Help! The Lord have mercy on us!</div>
      <div class="line">Peer! We’re drowning——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">I was born</div>
      <div class="line">For a braver death——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Ay, true;</div>
      <div class="line">Sure enough you’ll hang at last!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Tugging at his hair.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Oh, you brute!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">Keep quiet now;</div>
      <div class="line">Here the bottom’s slippery-slimy.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ass!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_18">18</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in5">That’s right, don’t spare your tongue;</div>
      <div class="line">That does no one any harm.</div>
      <div class="line">Now it’s shelving up again——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Don’t you drop me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Heisan! Hop!</div>
      <div class="line">Now we’ll play at Peer and reindeer;—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Curvetting.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I’m the reindeer, you are Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, I’m going clean distraught!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">See now—we have reached the shallows;—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Wades ashore.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Come, a kiss now, for the reindeer;</div>
      <div class="line">Just to thank him for the ride——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Boxing his ears.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This is how I thank him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Ow!</div>
      <div class="line">That’s a miserable fare!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Put me down!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">First to the wedding.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_19">19</span>Be my spokesman. You’re so clever;</div>
      <div class="line">Talk to him, the old curmudgeon;</div>
      <div class="line">Say Mads Moen’s good for nothing——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Put me down!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">And tell him then</div>
      <div class="line">What a rare lad is Peer Gynt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Truly, you may swear to that!</div>
      <div class="line">Fine’s the character I’ll give you.</div>
      <div class="line">Through and through I’ll show you up;</div>
      <div class="line">All about your devil’s pranks</div>
      <div class="line">I will tell them straight and plain——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Will you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Kicking with rage.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">I won’t stay my tongue</div>
      <div class="line">Till the old man sets his dog</div>
      <div class="line">At you, as you were a tramp!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">H’m; then I must go alone.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, but I’ll come after you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mother dear, you haven’t strength——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_20">20</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Strength? When I’m in such a rage,</div>
      <div class="line">I could crush the rocks to powder!</div>
      <div class="line">Hu! I’d make a meal of flints!</div>
      <div class="line">Put me down!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">You’ll promise then——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Nothing! I’ll to Hegstad with you!</div>
      <div class="line">They shall know you, what you are!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Then you’ll even have to stay here.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Never! To the feast I’m coming!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That you shan’t.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">What will you do?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Perch you on the mill-house roof.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>He puts her up on the roof. <span class="sc">Åse</span> screams.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Lift me down!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Yes, if you’ll listen—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Rubbish!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">Dearest mother, pray——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_21">21</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Throwing a sod of grass at him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Lift me down this moment, Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If I dared, be sure I would.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Coming nearer.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Now remember, sit quite still.</div>
      <div class="line">Do not sprawl and kick about;</div>
      <div class="line">Do not tug and tear the shingles,—</div>
      <div class="line">Else ’twill be the worse for you;</div>
      <div class="line">You might topple down.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">You <a id="corr21.12"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="beast">beast!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_21.12"><ins class="correction" title="beast">beast!</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Do not kick!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">I’d have you blown,</div>
      <div class="line">Like a changeling, into space!<a id="r29"></a><a href="#f29" class="c012"><sup>[29]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mother, fie!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Bah!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Rather give your</div>
      <div class="line">Blessing on my undertaking.</div>
      <div class="line">Will you? Eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">I’ll thrash you soundly,</div>
      <div class="line">Hulking fellow though you be!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_22">22</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, good-bye then, mother dear!</div>
      <div class="line">Patience; I’ll be back ere long</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Is going, but turns, holds up his finger
warningly, and says</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Careful now, don’t kick and sprawl!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer!—God help me, now he’s off;</div>
      <div class="line">Reindeer-rider! Liar! Hei!</div>
      <div class="line">Will you listen!—No, he’s striding</div>
      <div class="line">O’er the meadow——! [<i>Shrieks.</i>] Help. I’m dizzy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024"><i><span class="sc">Two Old Women</span>, with sacks on their backs,
come down the path to the mill.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">First Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Christ, who’s screaming?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">It is I!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Åse! Well, you are exalted!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This won’t be the end of it;—</div>
      <div class="line">Soon, God help me, I’ll be heaven <a id="corr22.23"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="high">high.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_22.23"><ins class="correction" title="high">high.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">First Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Bless your passing!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Fetch a ladder;</div>
      <div class="line">I must be down! That devil Peer——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_23">23</span><span class="sc">Second Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer! Your son?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Now you can say</div>
      <div class="line">You have seen how he behaves.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">First Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We’ll bear witness.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Only help me;</div>
      <div class="line">Straight to Hegstad will I hasten——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is he there?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">First Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">You’ll be revenged, then;</div>
      <div class="line">Aslak Smith will be there too.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Wringing her hands.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, God help me with my boy;</div>
      <div class="line">They will kill him ere they’re done!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">First Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, that lot has oft been talked of;</div>
      <div class="line">Comfort you: what must be must be!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">She is utterly demented.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Calls up the hill.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Eivind, Anders! Hei! Come here!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man’s Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What’s amiss?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Peer Gynt has perched his</div>
      <div class="line">Mother on the mill-house roof!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_24">24</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE SECOND.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c022"><i>A hillock, covered with bushes and heather. The highroad
runs behind it; a fence between.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> comes along a footpath, goes quickly up
to the fence, stops, and looks out over the distant
prospect.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c019">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yonder lies Hegstad. Soon I’ll have reached it.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Puts one leg over the fence; then hesitates.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Wonder if Ingrid’s alone in the house now?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Shades his eyes with his hand, and looks out.</i></div>
      <div class="line">No; to the farm guests are swarming like midges.—</div>
      <div class="line">H’m, to turn back now perhaps would be wisest.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Draws back his leg.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Still they must titter behind your back,</div>
      <div class="line">And whisper so that it burns right through you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Moves a few steps away from the fence, and
begins absently plucking leaves.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, if I’d only a good strong dram now.</div>
      <div class="line">Or if I could pass to and fro unseen.—</div>
      <div class="line">Or were I unknown.—Something proper and strong</div>
      <div class="line">Were the best thing of all, for the laughter don’t bite then.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Looks around suddenly as though afraid;
then hides among the bushes. Some
<span class="sc">Wedding-guests</span><a id="r30"></a><a href="#f30" class="c012"><sup>[30]</sup></a> pass by, going downwards
towards the farm.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In conversation as they pass.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">His father was drunken, his mother is weak.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_25">25</span><span class="sc">A Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, then it’s no wonder the lad’s good for nought.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They pass on. Presently <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>
comes forward, his face flushed with
shame. He peers after them.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Softly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Was it me they were talking of?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>With a forced shrug.</i></div>
      <div class="line in32">Oh, let them <a id="corr25.10"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="chatter?">chatter.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_25.10"><ins class="correction" title="chatter?">chatter.</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line">After all, they can’t sneer the life out of my body.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Casts himself down upon the heathery
slope; lies for some time flat on his back
with his hands under his head, gazing up
into the sky.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What a strange sort of cloud! It is just like a horse.</div>
      <div class="line">There’s a man on it too—and a saddle—and bridle.—</div>
      <div class="line">And after it comes an old crone on a broomstick.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Laughs quietly to himself.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It is mother. She’s scolding and screaming: You beast!</div>
      <div class="line">Hei you, Peer Gynt——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>His eyes gradually close.</i></div>
      <div class="line in4">Ay, now she is frightened.—</div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt he rides first, and there follow him many.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">His steed it is gold-shod and crested with silver.</div>
      <div class="line">Himself he has gauntlets and sabre and scabbard.</div>
      <div class="line in2">His cloak it is long, and its lining is silken.</div>
      <div class="line">Full brave is the company riding behind him.</div>
      <div class="line in2">None of them, though, sits his charger so stoutly.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_26">26</span>None of them glitters like him in the sunshine.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">Down by the fence stand the people in clusters,</div>
      <div class="line">Lifting their hats, and agape gazing upwards.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Women are curtseying. All the world knows him,</div>
      <div class="line">Kaiser Peer Gynt, and his thousands of henchmen.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Sixpenny pieces and glittering shillings</div>
      <div class="line">Over the roadway he scatters like pebbles.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Rich as a lord grows each man in the parish.</div>
      <div class="line">High o’er the ocean Peer Gynt goes a-riding.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Engelland’s Prince on the seashore awaits him;</div>
      <div class="line">There too await him all Engelland’s maidens.</div>
      <div class="line">Engelland’s nobles and Engelland’s Kaiser,</div>
      <div class="line">See him come riding and rise from their banquet.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Raising his crown, hear the Kaiser address him——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Aslak the Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To some other young men, passing along the road.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Just look at Peer Gynt there, the drunken swine——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Starting half up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What, Kaiser——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Leaning against the fence and grinning.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Up with you, Peer, my <a id="corr26.23"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="lad">lad.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_26.23"><ins class="correction" title="lad">lad.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What the devil? The smith! What do you want here?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To the others.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He hasn’t got over the Lundëspree yet</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_27">27</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Jumping up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’d better be off!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">I am going, yes.</div>
      <div class="line">But tell us, where have you dropped from, man?</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve been gone six weeks. Were you troll-taken, eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I have been doing strange deeds, Aslak Smith!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Winking to the others.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let us hear them, Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">They are nought to you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>After a pause.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re going to Hegstad?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">No.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Time was</div>
      <div class="line">They said that the girl there was fond of you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You grimy crow——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Falling back a little.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Keep your temper, Peer</div>
      <div class="line">Though Ingrid has jilted you, others are left;—</div>
      <div class="line">Think—son of Jon Gynt! Come on to the feast;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_28">28</span>You’ll find there both lambkins and well-seasoned widows——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To hell——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">You will surely find one that will have you.—</div>
      <div class="line">Good evening! I’ll give your respects to the bride.—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>They go off, laughing and whispering.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Looks after them a while, then makes a defiant</i></div>
    <div><i>motion and turns half round</i>.]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">For my part, may Ingrid of Hegstad go marry</div>
      <div class="line">Whoever she pleases. It’s all one to me.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks down at his clothes.</i></div>
      <div class="line">My breeches are torn. I am ragged and grim.—</div>
      <div class="line">If only I had something new to put on now.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Stamps on the ground.</i></div>
      <div class="line">If only I could, with a butcher-grip,</div>
      <div class="line">Tear out the scorn from their very vitals!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Looks round suddenly.</i></div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What was that? Who was it that tittered behind there?</div>
      <div class="line">H’m, I certainly thought—— No no, it was no one.—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll go home to mother.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Begins to go upwards, but stops again and
listens towards Hegstad.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">They’re playing a dance!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Gazes and listens; moves downwards step
by step, his eyes glisten; he rubs his
hands down his thighs.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How the lasses do swarm! Six or eight to a man!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, galloping death,—I must join in the frolic!—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_29">29</span>But how about mother, perched up on the mill-house——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>His eyes are drawn downwards again; he
leaps and laughs.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hei, how the Halling<a id="r31"></a><a href="#f31" class="c012"><sup>[31]</sup></a> flies over the green!</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, Guttorm, he can make his fiddle speak out!</div>
      <div class="line">It gurgles and booms like a foss<a id="r32"></a><a href="#f32" class="c012"><sup>[32]</sup></a> o’er a scaur.</div>
      <div class="line">And then all that glittering bevy of girls!—</div>
      <div class="line">Yes, galloping death, I must join in the frolic!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Leaps over the fence and goes down the road.</i></div>

<h3 class="c027">SCENE THIRD.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>The farm-place at Hegstad. In the background, the
dwelling-house. <span class="sc">A Throng of Guests.</span> A
lively dance in progress on the green. <span class="sc">The
Fiddler</span> sits on a table. <span class="sc">The Kitchen-master</span><a id="r33"></a><a href="#f33" class="c012"><sup>[33]</sup></a>
is standing in the doorway. <span class="sc">Cookmaids</span> are
going to and fro between the different buildings.
Groups of <span class="sc">Elderly People</span> sit here and there,
talking.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">A Woman.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Joins a group that is seated on some logs of wood.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The bride? Oh yes, she is crying a bit;</div>
      <div class="line">But that, you know, isn’t worth heeding.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Kitchen-master.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In another group.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now then, good folk, you must empty the barrel.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thanks to you, friend; but you fill up too quick.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_30">30</span><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To the Fiddler, as he flies past, holding a Girl by</i></div>
    <div><i>the hand.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To it now, Guttorm, and don’t spare the fiddle-strings!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Scrape till it echoes out over the meadows!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Other Girls.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Standing in a ring round a lad who is dancing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That’s a rare fling!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">He has legs that can lift him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Dancing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The roof here is high,<a id="r34"></a><a href="#f34" class="c012"><sup>[34]</sup></a> and the walls wide asunder!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c022">[<i>Comes whimpering up to his <span class="sc">Father</span>, who is standing
talking with some other men, and twitches his
jacket.</i>]</p>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Father, she will not; she is so proud!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">His Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What won’t she do?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">She has locked herself in.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">His Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, you must manage to find the key.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_31">31</span><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I don’t know how.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">His Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">You’re a nincompoop!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Turns away to the others. The <span class="sc">Bridegroom</span>
drifts across the yard.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Comes from behind the house.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Wait a bit, girls! Things’ll soon be lively!</div>
      <div class="line">Here comes Peer Gynt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Who has just come up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Who invited him?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Kitchen-master.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in39">No one.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Goes towards the house.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To the girls.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If he should speak to you, never take notice!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Girl.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To the others.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, we’ll pretend that we don’t even see him.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Comes in heated and full of animation, stops right</i></div>
    <div><i>in front of the group, and claps his hands.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Which is the liveliest girl of the lot of you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Girl.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>As he approaches her.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I am not.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_32">32</span><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Similarly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I am not.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Third.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">No; nor I either.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To a fourth.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You come along, then, for want of a better.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Haven’t got time.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To a fifth.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Well then, you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Girl.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Going.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in34">I’m for home.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To-night? are you utterly out of your senses?<a id="r35"></a><a href="#f35" class="c012"><sup>[35]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>After a moment, in a low voice.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">See, Peer, she’s taken a greybeard for partner.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Turns sharply to an elderly man.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Where are the unbespoke girls?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">Find them out.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Goes away from him.</i></div>

<p class="c022"><span class="pageno" id="Page_33">33</span><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> has suddenly become subdued. He
glances shyly and furtively at the group. All
look at him, but no one speaks. He approaches
other groups. Wherever he goes there is <a id="corr33.4"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="silence">silence;</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_33.4"><ins class="correction" title="silence">silence;</ins></a></span>
when he moves away they look after him and
smile.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To himself.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mocking looks; needle-keen whispers<a id="r36"></a><a href="#f36" class="c012"><sup>[36]</sup></a> and smiles.</div>
      <div class="line">They grate like a sawblade under the file!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He slinks along close to the fence. <span class="sc">Solveig</span>,
leading little <span class="sc">Helga</span> by the hand, comes
into the yard, along with her <span class="sc">Parents</span>.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To another, close to <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Look, here are the new folk.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Other.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">The ones from the west?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The First Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, the people from Hedal.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Other.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Ah yes, so they are.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Places himself in the path of the new-comers, points</i></div>
    <div><i>to <span class="sc">Solveig</span>, and asks the <span class="sc">Father</span></i>:]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">May I dance with your daughter?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Quietly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">You may so; but first</div>
      <div class="line">We must go to the farm-house and greet the good people.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>They go in.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_34">34</span><span class="sc">The Kitchen-master.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>, offering him drink.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Since you are here, you’d best take a pull at the liquor.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Looking fixedly after the new-comers.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thanks; I’m for dancing; I am not athirst.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>The <span class="sc">Kitchen-master</span> goes away from
him. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> gazes towards the
house and laughs.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How fair! Did ever you see the like!</div>
      <div class="line">Looked down at her shoes and her snow-white apron—!</div>
      <div class="line">And then she held on to her mother’s skirt-folds,</div>
      <div class="line">And carried a psalm-book wrapped up in a kerchief—!</div>
      <div class="line">I must look at that girl.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Going into the house.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Coming out of the house, with several others.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">Are you off so soon, Peer,</div>
      <div class="line">From the dance?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">No, no.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Then you’re heading amiss!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Takes hold of his shoulder to turn him
round.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let me pass!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">I believe you’re afraid of the smith.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_35">35</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I afraid!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">You remember what happened at Lundë?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They go off, laughing, to the dancing-green.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In the doorway of the house.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are you not the lad that was wanting to dance?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Of course it was me; don’t you know me again?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Takes her hand.</i></div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come, then!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">We mustn’t go far, mother said.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mother said! Mother said! Were you born yesterday?<a id="r37"></a><a href="#f37" class="c012"><sup>[37]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now you’re laughing——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Why sure, you are almost a child.</div>
      <div class="line">Are you grown up?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">I read with the pastor last spring.<a id="r38"></a><a href="#f38" class="c012"><sup>[38]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Tell me your name, lass, and then we’ll talk easier.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_36">36</span><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My name is Solveig. And what are you called?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Withdrawing her hand.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Oh heaven!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Why, what is it now?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My garter is loose; I must tie it up tighter.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Goes away from him.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pulling at his <span class="sc">Mother’s</span> gown.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mother, she will not——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">His Mother.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">She will not? What?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">She won’t, mother——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">His Mother.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">What?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Unlock the door.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">His Father.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Angrily, below his breath.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, you’re only fit to be tied in a stall!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_37">37</span><span class="sc">His Mother.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Don’t scold him. Poor dear, he’ll be all right yet.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>They move away.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Coming with a whole crowd of others from</i></div>
    <div><i>the dancing-green.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer, have some brandy?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">No.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Only a drain?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Looking darkly at him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Got any?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">Well, I won’t say but I have.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Pulls out a pocket flask and drinks.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Ah! How it stings your throat!—Well?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in38">Let me try it.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Drinks.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now you must try mine as well, you know.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in4">Oh, what nonsense; now don’t be a fool.</div>
      <div class="line">Take a pull, Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_38">38</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Well then, give me a drop.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Drinks again.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Girl.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Half aloud.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come, let’s be going.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Afraid of me, wench?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Third Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who isn’t afraid of <em class="gesperrt">you</em>?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Fourth.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">At Lundë</div>
      <div class="line">You showed us clearly what tricks you could play.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I can do more than that, when I once get started!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The First Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Whispering.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now he’s forging ahead!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Several Others.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Forming a circle around him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Tell away! Tell away!</div>
      <div class="line">What can you——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">To-morrow!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Others.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">No, now, to-night!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Can you conjure, Peer?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_39">39</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">I can call up the devil!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My grandam could do that before I was born!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Liar! What <i>I</i> can do, that no one else can.</div>
      <div class="line">I one day conjured him into a nut.</div>
      <div class="line">It was worm-bored, you see!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Several.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Laughing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Ay, that’s easily guessed!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He cursed, and he wept, and he wanted to bribe me</div>
      <div class="line">With all sorts of things——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">One of the Crowd.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">But he had to go in?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Of course. I stopped up the hole with a peg.</div>
      <div class="line">Hei! If you’d heard him rumbling and grumbling!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Only think!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">It was just like a humble-bee buzzing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Have you got him still in the nut?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in35">Why, no;</div>
      <div class="line">By this time that devil has flown on his way.</div>
      <div class="line">The grudge the smith bears me is all his doing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_40">40</span><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Indeed?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">I went to the smithy, and begged</div>
      <div class="line">That he would crack that same nutshell for me.</div>
      <div class="line">He promised he would!—laid it down on his anvil;</div>
      <div class="line">But Aslak, you know, is so heavy of hand;—</div>
      <div class="line">For ever swinging that great sledge-hammer——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Voice from the Crowd.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Did he kill the foul fiend?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">He laid on like a man.</div>
      <div class="line">But the devil showed fight, and tore off in a flame</div>
      <div class="line">Through the roof, and shattered the wall asunder.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Several Voices.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And the smith——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Stood there with his hands all scorched.</div>
      <div class="line">And from that day onwards, we’ve never been friends.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>General laughter.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Some of the Crowd.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That yarn is a good one.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Others.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">About his best.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Do you think I am making it up?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_41">41</span><span class="sc">A Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">Oh no,</div>
      <div class="line">That you’re certainly not; for I’ve heard the most on’t</div>
      <div class="line">From my grandfather——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Liar! It happened to me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, like everything else.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a fling.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">I can ride, I can,</div>
      <div class="line">Clean through the air, on the bravest of steeds!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, many’s the thing I can do, I tell you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Another roar of laughter.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">One of the Group.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer, ride through the air a bit!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Many.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in34">Do, dear Peer Gynt——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You may spare you the trouble of begging so hard.</div>
      <div class="line">I will ride like a hurricane over you all!</div>
      <div class="line">Every man in the parish shall fall at my feet!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">An Elderly Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now he is clean off his head.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">The dolt!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_42">42</span><span class="sc">A Third.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Braggart!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Fourth.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">Liar!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Threatening them.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Ay, wait till you see!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Half drunk.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, wait; you’ll soon get your jacket dusted!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Others.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Your back beaten tender! Your eyes painted blue!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>The crowd disperses, the elder men angry,
the younger laughing and jeering.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Close to <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer, is it true you can ride through the air?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shortly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s all true, Mads! You must know I’m a rare one!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Then have you got the Invisible Cloak too?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Invisible Hat, do you mean? Yes, I have.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Turns away from him. <span class="sc">Solveig</span> crosses
the yard, leading little <span class="sc">Helga</span>.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_43">43</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Goes towards them; his face lights up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Solveig! Oh, it is well you have come!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Takes hold of her wrist.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Now will I swing you round fast and fine!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Loose me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">Wherefore?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">You are so wild.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The reindeer is wild, too, when summer is dawning.</div>
      <div class="line">Come then, lass; do not be wayward now!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Withdrawing her arm.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Dare not.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">Wherefore?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">No, you’ve been drinking.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Moves off with <span class="sc">Helga</span>.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, if I had but my knife-blade driven</div>
      <div class="line">Clean through the heart of them,—one and all!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Nudging him with his elbow.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer, can’t you help me to get at the bride?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_44">44</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Absently.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The bride? Where is she?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">In the store-house.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in45">Ah.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, dear Peer Gynt, you must try at least!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, you must get on without my help.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>A thought strikes him; he says softly but
sharply.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ingrid! The store-house!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes up to <span class="sc">Solveig</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line in21">Have you thought better on’t?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i><span class="sc">Solveig</span> tries to go; he blocks her path.</i></div>
      <div class="line">You’re ashamed to, because I’ve the look of a tramp.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hastily.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, that you haven’t; that’s not true at all!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes! And I’ve taken a drop as well;</div>
      <div class="line">But that was to spite you, because you had hurt me.</div>
      <div class="line">Come then!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Even if I wished to, I daren’t.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who are you frightened of?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_45">45</span><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Father, most.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Father? Ay, ay; he is one of the quiet ones!</div>
      <div class="line">One of the godly, eh?—Answer, come!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What shall I say?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Is your father a psalm-singer?<a id="r39"></a><a href="#f39" class="c012"><sup>[39]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">And you and your mother as well, no doubt?</div>
      <div class="line">Come, will you speak?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Let me go in peace.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>In a low but sharp and threatening tone.</i></div>
      <div class="line in4">I can turn myself into a troll!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll come to your bedside at midnight to-night.</div>
      <div class="line">If you should hear some one hissing and spitting,</div>
      <div class="line">You mustn’t imagine it’s only the cat.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s me, lass! I’ll drain out your blood in a cup,</div>
      <div class="line">And your little sister, I’ll eat her up;</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, you must know I’m a were-wolf at night;—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll bite you all over the loins and the back——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Suddenly changes his tone, and entreats, as
if in dread</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Dance with me, lass!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Looking darkly at him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">You were ugly then.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Goes into the house</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_46">46</span><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Comes sidling up again.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ll give you an ox if you’ll help me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in39">Then come!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They go out behind the house. At the same
moment a crowd of men come forward from
the dancing green; most of them are drunk.
Noise and hubbub. <span class="sc">Solveig</span>, <span class="sc">Helga</span>, and
their <span class="sc">Parents</span> appear among a number of
elderly people in the doorway.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Kitchen-master.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To the <span class="sc">Smith</span>, who is the foremost of the crowd.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Keep peace now!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pulling off his jacket.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">No, we must fight it out here.<a id="r40"></a><a href="#f40" class="c012"><sup>[40]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt or I must be taught a lesson.<a id="r41"></a><a href="#f41" class="c012"><sup>[41]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Some Voices.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, let them fight for it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Others.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">No, only wrangle!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Fists must decide; for the case is past words.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig’s Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Control yourself, man!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_47">47</span><span class="sc">Helga.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Will they beat him, mother?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let us rather taunt him with all his lies!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Kick him out of the company.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Third.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Spit in his eyes.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Fourth.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To the <span class="sc">Smith</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re not backing out, smith?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Flinging away his jacket.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">The jade shall be slaughtered!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig’s Mother.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To <span class="sc">Solveig</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There, you can see how that windbag is thought of.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Coming up with a stick in her hand.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is that son of mine here? Now he’s in for a drubbing!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh! how heartily I will dang him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Rolling up his shirt-sleeves.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That switch is too light for a carcase like <a id="corr47.26"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="his">his.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_47.26"><ins class="correction" title="his">his.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_48">48</span><span class="sc">Some of the Crowd.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The smith will dang him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Others.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Bang him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Spits on his hands and nods to Åse.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in35">Hang him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What? Hang my Peer? Ay, just try if you dare;—</div>
      <div class="line">Åse and I,<a id="r42"></a><a href="#f42" class="c012"><sup>[42]</sup></a> we have teeth and claws!—</div>
      <div class="line">Where is he? [<i>Calls across the yard.</i>] Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Comes running up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">Oh, God’s death on the cross!</div>
      <div class="line">Come father, come mother, and——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">His Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in31">What is the matter?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Just fancy, Peer Gynt——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Screams</i>.]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Have you taken his life?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, but Peer Gynt——! Look, there on the hillside——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Crowd.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">With the <a id="corr48.26"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="bride">bride.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_48.26"><ins class="correction" title="bride">bride.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_49">49</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Lets her stick sink.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Oh, the beast!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Smith.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>As if thunderstruck.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Where the slope rises sheerest</div>
      <div class="line">He’s clambering upwards, by God, like a goat!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bridegroom.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Crying.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He’s shouldered her, mother, as I might a pig!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shaking her fist up at him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Would God you might fall, and——!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Screams out in terror.</i></div>
      <div class="line in26">Take care of your footing!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Hegstad Farmer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Comes in, bare-headed and white with rage.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ll have his life for this bride-rape yet!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh no, God punish me if I let you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f22">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r22">22</a>. Pronounce <i>Yendeen</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f23">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r23">23</a>. This is the poet’s own explanation of this difficult passage.
<span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Hvirvlens vætter,”</span> he writes, is equivalent to <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Svimmelhedens
ånder”</span>—<i>i.e.</i>, spirits of dizziness or vertigo.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f24">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r24">24</a>. See Appendix.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f25">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r25">25</a>. Literally “bushels.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f26">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r26">26</a>. An ecclesiastical dignitary—something equivalent to a rural
dean.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f27">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r27">27</a>. “<span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">Jon med Skjæppen</span>”—literally, “John with the Bushel”—a
nickname given him in his days of prosperity, in allusion to
his supposed bushels of money.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f28">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r28">28</a>. Pronounce <i>Maass-Moo-en</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f29">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r29">29</a>. It is believed in some parts of Norway that “changelings”
(elf-children left in the stead of those taken away by the fairies)
can, by certain spells, be made to fly away up the chimney.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f30">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r30">30</a>. “Sendingsfolk,” literally, “folks with presents.” When the
Norwegian peasants are bidden to a wedding-feast, they bring
with them presents of eatables.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f31">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r31">31</a>. A somewhat violent peasant dance.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f32">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r32">32</a>. Foss (in the North of England “force”)—a waterfall.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f33">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r33">33</a>. A sort of master of ceremonies.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f34">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r34">34</a>. To kick the rafters is considered a great feat in the Halling-dance.
The boy means that, in the open air, his leaps are not
limited even by the rafters.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f35">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r35">35</a>. A marriage party among the peasants will often last several
days.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f36">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r36">36</a>. Literally, “thoughts.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f37">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r37">37</a>. Literally, “last year.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f38">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r38">38</a>. “To read with the pastor,” the preliminary to confirmation,
is currently used as synonymous with “to be confirmed.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f39">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r39">39</a>. Literally, “A reader.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f40">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r40">40</a>. Literally, “Here shall judgment be called for.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f41">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r41">41</a>. Literally, “Must be bent to the hillside,” made to bite the
dust—but not in the sense of being killed.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f42">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r42">42</a>. A peasant idiom.</p>
</div>
<hr class="c018" />

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_50">50</span>
  <h2 class="c008">ACT SECOND</h2>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FIRST.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>A narrow path, high up in the mountains. Early
morning.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> comes hastily and sullenly along the path.
<span class="sc">Ingrid</span>, still wearing some of her bridal ornaments,
is trying to hold him back.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Get you from me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Weeping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">After this, Peer?</div>
      <div class="line">Whither?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">Where you will for me.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Wringing her hands.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, what falsehood!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Useless railing.</div>
      <div class="line">Each alone must go his way.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Sin—and sin again unites us!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_51">51</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Devil take all recollections!</div>
      <div class="line">Devil take the tribe of women—</div>
      <div class="line">All but one——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Who is that one, pray?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">’Tis not you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Who is it then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Go! Go thither whence you came!</div>
      <div class="line">Off! To your father!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Dearest, sweetest——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peace!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in7">You cannot mean it, surely,</div>
      <div class="line">What you’re saying?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Can and do.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">First to lure—and then forsake me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And what terms have you to offer?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hegstad Farm, and more besides.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_52">52</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is your psalm-book in your kerchief?</div>
      <div class="line">Where’s the gold-mane on your shoulders?</div>
      <div class="line">Do you glance adown your apron?</div>
      <div class="line">Do you hold your mother’s skirt-fold?</div>
      <div class="line">Speak!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in7">No, but——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Went you to the Pastor<a id="r43"></a><a href="#f43" class="c012"><sup>[43]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">This last spring-tide?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">No, but Peer——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is there shyness in your glances?</div>
      <div class="line">When I beg, can you deny?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Heaven! I think his wits are going.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Does your presence sanctify?<a id="r44"></a><a href="#f44" class="c012"><sup>[44]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Speak!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in7">No, but——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">What’s all the rest then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Going.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_53">53</span><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Blocking his way.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Know you it will cost your neck</div>
      <div class="line">Should you fail me?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">What do I care?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You may win both wealth and honour</div>
      <div class="line">If you take me——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Can’t afford.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Bursting into tears.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, you lured me——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">You were willing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I was desperate!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Frantic I.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Threatening.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Dearly shall you pay for this!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Dearest payment cheap I’ll reckon.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is your purpose set?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_54">54</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Like flint.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good! we’ll see, then, who’s the winner!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes downwards.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stands silent a moment, then cries</i>:]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Devil take all recollections!</div>
      <div class="line">Devil take the tribe of women!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Ingrid.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Turning her head, and calling mockingly upwards</i>:]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All but <em class="gesperrt">one</em>!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, all but <em class="gesperrt">one</em>.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>They go their several ways.</i></div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE SECOND.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>Near a mountain tarn; the ground is soft and marshy
round about. A storm is gathering.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Åse</span> enters, calling and gazing around her despairingly,
in every direction. <span class="sc">Solveig</span> has difficulty in
keeping up with her. <span class="sc">Solveig’s Father</span> and
<span class="sc">Mother</span>, with <span class="sc">Helga</span>, are some way behind.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Tossing about her arms, and tearing her hair.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All things are against me with wrathful might!</div>
      <div class="line">Heaven, and the waters, and the grisly mountains!</div>
      <div class="line">Fog-scuds from heaven roll down to bewilder <a id="corr54.27"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="him">him!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_54.27"><ins class="correction" title="him">him!</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_55">55</span>The treacherous waters are lurking to murder him!</div>
      <div class="line">The mountains would crush him with landslip and rift!—</div>
      <div class="line">And the people too! They’re out after his life!</div>
      <div class="line">God knows they shan’t have it! I can’t bear to lose him!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, the oaf! to think that the fiend should tempt him!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Turning to <span class="sc">Solveig</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line in2">Now isn’t it clean unbelievable this?</div>
      <div class="line">He, that did nought but romance and tell lies;—</div>
      <div class="line">He, whose sole strength was the strength of his jaw;</div>
      <div class="line">He, that did never a stroke of true work;—</div>
      <div class="line">He——! Oh, a body could both cry and laugh!—</div>
      <div class="line in2">Oh, we clung closely in sorrow and need.</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, you must know that my husband, he drank,</div>
      <div class="line">Loafed round the parish to roister and prate,</div>
      <div class="line">Wasted and trampled our gear under foot.</div>
      <div class="line">And meanwhile at home there sat Peerkin and I—</div>
      <div class="line">The best we could do was to try to forget;</div>
      <div class="line">For ever I’ve found it so hard to bear up.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s a terrible thing to look fate in the eyes;</div>
      <div class="line">And of course one is glad to be quit of one’s cares,</div>
      <div class="line">And try all one can to hold thinking aloof.</div>
      <div class="line">Some take to brandy, and others to lies;</div>
      <div class="line">And we—why we took to fairy-tales</div>
      <div class="line">Of princes and trolls and of all sorts of beasts;</div>
      <div class="line">And of bride-rapes as well. Ah, but who could have dreamt</div>
      <div class="line">That those devil’s yarns would have stuck in his head?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>In a fresh access of terror.</i></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_56">56</span>Hu! What a scream! It’s the nixie or droug!<a id="r45"></a><a href="#f45" class="c012"><sup>[45]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Peer! Peer!—Up there on that hillock——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>She runs to the top of a little rise, and looks
out over the tarn. <span class="sc">Solveig’s Father</span>
and <span class="sc">Mother</span> come up.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Not a sign to be seen!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Quietly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">It is worst for him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Weeping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, my Peer! Oh, my own lost lamb!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Nods mildly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You may well say lost.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Oh no, don’t talk like that!</div>
      <div class="line">He is so clever. There’s no one like him.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You foolish woman!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Oh ay; oh ay;</div>
      <div class="line">Foolish I am, but the boy’s all right!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Still softly and with mild eyes.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">His heart is hardened, his soul is lost.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_57">57</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In terror.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, no, he can’t be so hard, our Lord!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Do you think he can sigh for his debt of sin?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Eagerly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, but he can ride through the air on a buck, though!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Mother.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Christ, are you mad?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Why, what do you mean?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Never a deed is too great for him.</div>
      <div class="line">You shall see, if only he lives so long——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Best if you saw him on the gallows hanging.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shrieks.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, cross of Christ!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">In the hangman’s hands,</div>
      <div class="line">It may be his heart would be turned to repentance.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Bewildered.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, you’ll soon talk me out of my senses!</div>
      <div class="line">We must find him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_58">58</span><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">To rescue his soul.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in35">And his body!</div>
      <div class="line">If he’s stuck in the swamp, we must drag him out;</div>
      <div class="line">If he’s taken by trolls, we must ring the bells for him.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">H’m!—Here’s a sheep path——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">The Lord will repay you</div>
      <div class="line">Your guidance and help!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">It’s a Christian’s duty.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Then the others, fie! they are heathens all;</div>
      <div class="line">There was never a one that would go with us——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">They knew him too well.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">He was too good for them!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Wrings her hands.</i></div>
      <div class="line">And to think—and to think that his life is at stake!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Here are tracks of a man.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Then it’s here we must search!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_59">59</span><span class="sc">The Father.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We’ll scatter around on this side of our sæter.<a id="r46"></a><a href="#f46" class="c012"><sup>[46]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>He and his wife go on ahead.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To <span class="sc">Åse</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Say on; tell me more.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Drying her eyes.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Of my son, you mean?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in43">Yes;—</div>
      <div class="line">Tell everything!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Smiles and tosses her head.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Everything?—Soon you’d be tired!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Sooner by far will you tire of the telling</div>
      <div class="line">Than I of the hearing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE THIRD.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>Low, treeless heights, close under the mountain moorlands;
peaks in the distance. The shadows are
long; it is late in the day.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> comes running at full speed, and stops
short on the hillside.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The parish is all at my heels in a pack!</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_60">60</span>Everyman of them armed or with gun or with club.</div>
      <div class="line">Foremost I hear the old Hegstad-churl howling.—</div>
      <div class="line">Now it’s noised far and wide that Peer Gynt is abroad!</div>
      <div class="line">It is different, this, from a bout with a smith!</div>
      <div class="line">This is life! Every limb grows as strong as a bear’s.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Strikes out with his arms and leaps in the air.</i></div>
      <div class="line">To crush, overturn, stem the rush of the foss!<a id="r47"></a><a href="#f47" class="c012"><sup>[47]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">To strike! Wrench the fir-tree right up by the root!</div>
      <div class="line">This is life! This both hardens and lifts one high!</div>
      <div class="line">To hell then with all of the savourless lies!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Three Sæter Girls.</span><a id="r48"></a><a href="#f48" class="c012"><sup>[48]</sup></a></div>
    <div>[<i>Rush across the hillside, screaming and singing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Trond of the Valfjeld!<a id="r49"></a><a href="#f49" class="c012"><sup>[49]</sup></a> Bård and Kårë!</div>
      <div class="line">Troll-pack! To-night would you sleep in our arms?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To whom do you call?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Girls.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">To the trolls! to the trolls!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">First Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Trond, come with kindness!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">BÃ¥rd, come with force!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Third Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The cots in the sæter are all standing empty!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_61">61</span><span class="sc">First Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Force is kindness!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">And kindness is force!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Third Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If lads are a wanting, one plays with the trolls!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, where are the lads, then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">All Three.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a horse-laugh.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">They cannot come hither!</div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">First Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mine called me his sweetheart and called me his darling.</div>
      <div class="line">Now he has married a grey-headed widow.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mine met a gipsy-wench north on the upland.</div>
      <div class="line">Now they are tramping the country together.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Third Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mine put an end to our bastard brat.</div>
      <div class="line">Now his head’s grinning aloft on a stake.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">All Three.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Trond of the Valfjeld! Bård and Kårë!</div>
      <div class="line">Troll-pack! To-night would you sleep in our arms!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stands, with a sudden leap, in the midst of them.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’m a three-headed troll, and the boy for three girls!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_62">62</span><span class="sc">The Girls.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are you such a lad, eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">You shall judge for yourselves!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">First Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To the hut! To the hut!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">We have mead!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in38">Let it flow!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Third Girl.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No cot shall stand empty this Saturday night!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Second Girl.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Kissing him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He sparkles and glisters like white-heated iron.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Third Girl.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Doing likewise.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Like a baby’s eyes from the blackest tarn.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Dancing in the midst of them.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Heavy of heart and wanton of mind.</div>
      <div class="line">The eyes full of laughter, the throat of tears!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Girls.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Making mocking gestures towards the mountain-tops,</i></div>
    <div><i>screaming and singing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Trond of the Valfjeld! Bård and Kårë!</div>
      <div class="line">Troll-pack!—To-night who shall sleep in our arms?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They dance away over the heights, with
<span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> in their midst.</i></p>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_63">63</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE FOURTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c022"><i>Among the Rondë mountains. Sunset. Shining snow-peaks
all around.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> enters, dizzy and bewildered.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Tower over tower arises!</div>
      <div class="line">Hei, what a glittering gate!</div>
      <div class="line">Stand! Will you stand! It’s drifting</div>
      <div class="line">Further and further away!</div>
      <div class="line">High on the vane the wind-cock</div>
      <div class="line">Arches his wings for flight;—</div>
      <div class="line">Blue spread the rifts and bluer,</div>
      <div class="line">Locked is the fell and barred.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">What are those trunks and tree-roots,</div>
      <div class="line">That grow from the ridge’s clefts?</div>
      <div class="line">They are warriors heron-footed!</div>
      <div class="line">Now they, too, are fading away.</div>
      <div class="line in2">A shimmering like rainbow-streamers</div>
      <div class="line">Goes shooting through eyes and brain.</div>
      <div class="line">What is it, that far-off chiming?</div>
      <div class="line">What’s weighing my eyebrows down?</div>
      <div class="line">Hu, how my forehead’s throbbing—</div>
      <div class="line">A tightening red-hot ring——!</div>
      <div class="line">I cannot think who the devil</div>
      <div class="line">as bound it around my head!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Sinks down.</i></div>
      <div class="line in2">Flight o’er the Edge of Gendin—</div>
      <div class="line">Stuff and accursed lies!</div>
      <div class="line">Up o’er the steepest hill-wall</div>
      <div class="line">With the bride,—and a whole day drunk;</div>
      <div class="line">Hunted by hawks and falcons,</div>
      <div class="line">Threatened by trolls and such,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_64">64</span>Sporting with crazy wenches:—</div>
      <div class="line">and accursed stuff!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Gazes long upwards.</i></div>
      <div class="line in2">Yonder sail two brown eagles.</div>
      <div class="line">Southward the wild geese fly.</div>
      <div class="line">And here I must splash and stumble</div>
      <div class="line">In quagmire and filth knee-deep!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Springs up.</i></div>
      <div class="line in2">I’ll fly too! I will wash myself clean in</div>
      <div class="line">The bath of the keenest winds!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll fly high! I will plunge myself fair in</div>
      <div class="line">The glorious christening-font!</div>
      <div class="line">I will soar far over the sæter;</div>
      <div class="line">I will ride myself pure of soul;</div>
      <div class="line">I will forth o’er the salt sea waters,</div>
      <div class="line">And high over Engelland’s prince!</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, gaze as ye may, young maidens;</div>
      <div class="line">My ride is for none of you;</div>
      <div class="line">You’re wasting your time in waiting—!</div>
      <div class="line">Yet maybe I’ll swoop down, too.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">What has come of the two brown eagles—?</div>
      <div class="line">They’ve vanished, the devil knows where!—</div>
      <div class="line in2">There’s the peak of a gable rising;</div>
      <div class="line">It’s soaring on every hand;</div>
      <div class="line">It’s growing from out the ruins;—</div>
      <div class="line">See, the gateway is standing wide!</div>
      <div class="line">Ha-ha, yonder house, I know it;</div>
      <div class="line">It’s grandfather’s new-built farm!</div>
      <div class="line">Gone are the clouts from the windows;</div>
      <div class="line">The crazy old fence is gone.</div>
      <div class="line">The lights gleam from every casement;</div>
      <div class="line">There’s a feast in the hall to-night.</div>
      <div class="line in2">There, that was the provost clinking</div>
      <div class="line">The back of his knife on his glass;—</div>
      <div class="line">There’s the captain flinging his bottle,</div>
      <div class="line">And shivering the mirror to bits.—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_65">65</span>Let them waste; let it all be squandered!</div>
      <div class="line">Peace, mother; what need we care!</div>
      <div class="line">’Tis the rich Jon Gynt gives the banquet;</div>
      <div class="line">Hurrah for the race of Gynt!</div>
      <div class="line">What’s all this bustle and hubbub?</div>
      <div class="line">Why do they shout and bawl?</div>
      <div class="line">The captain is calling the son in;—</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, the provost would drink my health.</div>
      <div class="line">In then, Peer Gynt, to the judgment;</div>
      <div class="line">It rings forth in song and shout:</div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt, thou art come of great things,</div>
      <div class="line">And great things shall come of thee!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Leaps forward, but runs his head against
a rock, falls, and remains stretched on
the ground.</i></p>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FIFTH.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>A hillside, wooded with great soughing trees. Stars
are gleaming through the leaves; birds are singing
in the tree-tops.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i>A <span class="sc">Green-clad Woman</span> is crossing the hillside; <span class="sc">Peer
Gynt</span> follows her, with all sorts of lover-like
antics.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stops and turns round.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is it true?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Drawing his finger across his throat.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">As true as my name is Peer;—</div>
      <div class="line">As true as that you are a lovely woman!</div>
      <div class="line">Will you have me? You’ll see what a fine man I’ll be;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_66">66</span>You shall neither tread the loom nor turn the spindle.</div>
      <div class="line">You shall eat all you want, till you’re ready to burst.</div>
      <div class="line">I never will drag you about by the hair——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Nor beat me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">No, can you think I would!</div>
      <div class="line">We kings’ sons never beat women and such.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re a king’s <a id="corr66.11"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="son">son?</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_66.11"><ins class="correction" title="son">son?</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Yes.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">I’m the Dovrë-King’s daughter.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are you! See there, now, how well that fits in!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Deep in the Rondë has father his palace.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My mother’s is bigger, or much I’m mistaken.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Do you know my father? His name is King Brosë.<a id="r50"></a><a href="#f50" class="c012"><sup>[50]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Do you know my mother? Her name is Queen Åsë.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">When my father is angry the mountains are riven.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_67">67</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">They reel when my mother by chance falls a-scolding.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My father can kick e’en the loftiest roof-tree.<a id="r51"></a><a href="#f51" class="c012"><sup>[51]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My mother can ride through the rapidest river.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Have you other garments besides those rags?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ho, you should just see my Sunday clothes!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My week-day gown is of gold and silk.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It looks to me liker tow and straws.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, there is one thing you must remember:—</div>
      <div class="line">This is the Rondë-folk’s use and wont:</div>
      <div class="line">All our possessions have two-fold form.</div>
      <div class="line">When shall you come to my father’s hall,</div>
      <div class="line">It well may chance that you’re on the point</div>
      <div class="line">Of thinking you stand in a dismal moraine.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well now, with us <a id="corr67.24"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="its">it’s</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_67.24"><ins class="correction" title="its">it’s</ins></a></span> precisely the same.</div>
      <div class="line">Our gold will seem to you litter and trash!</div>
      <div class="line">And you’ll think, mayhap, every glittering pane</div>
      <div class="line">Is nought but a bunch of old stockings and clouts.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_68">68</span><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Black it seems white, and ugly seems fair.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Big it seems little, and dirty seems clean.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Falling on his neck.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, Peer, now I see that we fit, you and I!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Like the leg and the trouser, the hair and the comb.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Calls away over the hillside.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Bridal-steed! Bridal-steed! Come, bridal-steed mine!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>A gigantic pig comes running in with a
rope’s end for a bridle and an old sack
for a saddle. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> vaults on its
back, and seats the <span class="sc">Green-clad One</span> in
front of him.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hark-away!  Through the Rondë-gate gallop we in!</div>
      <div class="line">Gee-up, gee-up, my courser fine!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Tenderly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, but lately I wandered and moped and pined—</div>
      <div class="line">One never can tell what may happen to one!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Thrashing the pig and trotting off.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You may know the great by their riding gear!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_69">69</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE SIXTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c022"><i>The Royal Hall of the King of the Dovrë-Trolls. A
great assembly of <span class="sc">Troll-courtiers</span>, <span class="sc">Gnomes</span>,
and <span class="sc">Brownies</span>. <span class="sc">The Old Man of the Dovrë</span>
sits on the throne, crowned, and with his sceptre
in his hand. His <span class="fss">CHILDREN</span> and <span class="fss">NEAREST
RELATIONS</span> are ranged on both sides. <span class="sc">Peer
Gynt</span> stands before him. Violent commotion in
the hall.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Troll-courtiers.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Slay him! a Christian-man’s son has deluded</div>
      <div class="line">The Dovrë-King’s loveliest maid!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Troll-imp.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">May I hack him on the fingers?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">May I tug him by the hair?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Troll-maiden.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hu, hei, let me bite him in the haunches!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Troll-witch.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a ladle.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Shall he be boiled into broth and bree?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another Troll-witch.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a chopper.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Shall he roast on a spit or be browned in a stewpan?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man of the Dovrë.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ice to your blood, friends!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Beckons his counsellors closer around him.</i></div>
      <div class="line in28"><span class="pageno" id="Page_70">70</span>Don’t let us talk big.</div>
      <div class="line">We’ve been drifting astern in these latter years;</div>
      <div class="line">We can’t tell what’s going to stand or to fall,</div>
      <div class="line">And there’s no sense in turning recruits away.</div>
      <div class="line">Besides the lad’s body has scarce a blemish,</div>
      <div class="line">And he’s strongly-built too, if I see aright.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s true, he has only a single head;</div>
      <div class="line">But my daughter, too, has no more than one.</div>
      <div class="line">Three-headed trolls are gone clean out of fashion;</div>
      <div class="line">One hardly sees even a two-header now,</div>
      <div class="line">And even those heads are but so-so ones.</div>
      <div class="c010">[<i>To <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i>]</div>
      <div class="line">It’s my daughter, then, you demand of me?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Your daughter and the realm to her dowry, yes.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You shall have the half while I’m still alive,</div>
      <div class="line">And the other half when I come to die.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’m content with that.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Ay, but stop, my lad;—</div>
      <div class="line">You also have some undertakings to give.</div>
      <div class="line">If you break even one, the whole pact’s at an end,</div>
      <div class="line">And you’ll never get away from here living.</div>
      <div class="line">First of all you must swear that you’ll never give heed</div>
      <div class="line">To aught that lies outside the Rondë-hills’ bounds;</div>
      <div class="line">Day you must shun, and deeds, and each sunlit spot.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Only call me king, and that’s easy to keep.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_71">71</span><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And next—now for putting your wits to the test.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Draws himself up in his seat.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Oldest Troll-courtier.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let us see if you have a wisdom-tooth</div>
      <div class="line">That can crack the Dovrë-King’s riddle-nut!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What difference is there ’twixt trolls and men?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No difference at all, as it seems to me.</div>
      <div class="line">Big trolls would roast you and small trolls would claw you;—</div>
      <div class="line">With us it were likewise, if only they dared.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">True enough; in that and in more we’re alike.</div>
      <div class="line">Yet morning is morning, and even is even,</div>
      <div class="line">And there is a difference all the same.—</div>
      <div class="line">Now let me tell you wherein it lies:</div>
      <div class="line">Out yonder, under the shining vault,</div>
      <div class="line">Among men the saying goes: <a id="corr71.21"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="Man">“Man</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_71.21"><ins class="correction" title="Man">“Man</ins></a></span>, be thyself!”</div>
      <div class="line">At home here with us, ’mid the tribe of the trolls,</div>
      <div class="line">The saying goes: “Troll, to thyself be—enough!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Troll-courtier.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To <span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Can you fathom the depth?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">It strikes me as misty.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_72">72</span><span class="sc">The Old Man</span>.</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My son, that “Enough,” that most potent and sundering</div>
      <div class="line">Word, must be graven upon your escutcheon.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Scratching his head.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, but——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">It <em class="gesperrt">must</em>, if you here would be master!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh well, let it pass; after all, it’s no worse——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And next you must learn to appreciate</div>
      <div class="line">Our homely, everyday way of life.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He beckons; two <span class="sc">Trolls</span> with pigs’-heads,
white night-caps, and so forth, bring in
food and drink.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The cow gives cakes and the bullock mead;</div>
      <div class="line">Ask not if its taste be sour or sweet;</div>
      <div class="line">The main matter is, and you mustn’t forget it,</div>
      <div class="line">It’s all of it home-brewed.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pushing the things away from him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The devil fly off with your home-brewed <a id="corr72.24"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="drinks">drinks!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_72.24"><ins class="correction" title="drinks">drinks!</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line">I’ll never get used to the ways of this land.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The bowl’s given in, and it’s fashioned of gold.</div>
      <div class="line">Whoso own the gold bowl, him my daughter holds dear.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_73">73</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pondering.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It is written: Thou shalt bridle the natural man;—</div>
      <div class="line">And I daresay the drink may in time seem less sour.</div>
      <div class="line">So be it!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Complies.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">Ay, that was sagaciously said.</div>
      <div class="line">You spit?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">One must trust to the force of habit.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And next you must throw off your Christian-man’s garb;</div>
      <div class="line">For this you must know to our Dovrë’s renown:</div>
      <div class="line">Here all things are mountain-made, nought’s from the dale,</div>
      <div class="line">Except the silk bow at the end of your tail.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Indignant.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I haven’t a tail!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Then of course you must get one.</div>
      <div class="line">See my Sunday-tail, Chamberlain, fastened to him.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ll be hanged if you do! Would you make me a fool?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">None comes courting my child with no tail at his rear.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_74">74</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Make a beast of a man!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Nay, my son, you mistake;</div>
      <div class="line">I make you a mannerly wooer, no more.</div>
      <div class="line">A bright orange bow we’ll allow you to wear,</div>
      <div class="line">And that passes here for the highest of honours.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Reflectively.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s true, as the saying goes: Man’s but a mote.</div>
      <div class="line">And it’s wisest to follow the fashion a bit.</div>
      <div class="line">Tie away!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">You’re a tractable fellow, I see.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Courtier.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Just try with what grace you can waggle and whisk it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Peevishly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ha, would you force me to go still further?</div>
      <div class="line">Do you ask me to give up my Christian faith?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, that you are welcome to keep in peace.</div>
      <div class="line">Doctrine goes free; upon that there’s no duty;</div>
      <div class="line">It’s the outward cut one must tell a troll by.</div>
      <div class="line">If we’re only at one in our manners and dress,</div>
      <div class="line">You may hold as your faith what to us is a horror.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, in spite of your many conditions, you are</div>
      <div class="line">A more reasonable chap than one might have expected.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_75">75</span><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We troll-folk, my son, are less black than we’re painted;<a id="r52"></a><a href="#f52" class="c012"><sup>[52]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">That’s another distinction between you and us.—</div>
      <div class="line">But the serious part of the meeting is over;</div>
      <div class="line">Now let us gladden our ears and our eyes.</div>
      <div class="line">Music-maid, forth! Set the Dovrë-harp sounding!</div>
      <div class="line">Dancing-maid, forth! Tread the Dovrë-hall’s floor!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Music and a dance.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Courtier.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How like you it?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Like it? H’m——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in34">Speak without fear!</div>
      <div class="line">What see you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Why something unspeakably grim:<a id="r53"></a><a href="#f53" class="c012"><sup>[53]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">A bell-cow with her hoof on a gut-harp strumming.</div>
      <div class="line">A sow in socklets a-trip to the tune.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Courtiers.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Eat him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">His sense is but human, remember!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Troll-Maidens.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hu, tear away both his ears and his eyes!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_76">76</span><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Weeping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hu-hu! And this we must hear and put up with,</div>
      <div class="line">When I and my sister make music and dance.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oho, was it you? Well, a joke at the feast,</div>
      <div class="line">You must know, is never unkindly meant.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Can you swear it was so?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Both the dance and the music</div>
      <div class="line">Were utterly charming, the cat claw me else.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This same human nature’s a singular thing;</div>
      <div class="line">It sticks to people so strangely long.</div>
      <div class="line">If it gets a gash in the fight with us,</div>
      <div class="line">It heals up at once, though a scar may remain.</div>
      <div class="line">My son-in-law, now, is as pliant as any;</div>
      <div class="line">He’s willingly thrown off his Christian-man’s garb,</div>
      <div class="line">He’s willingly drunk from our chalice of mead,</div>
      <div class="line">He’s willingly fastened the tail to his back,—</div>
      <div class="line">So willing, in short, did we find him in all things,</div>
      <div class="line">I thought to myself the old Adam, for certain,</div>
      <div class="line">Had for good and all been kicked out of doors;</div>
      <div class="line">But lo! in two shakes he’s atop again!</div>
      <div class="line">Ay ay, my son, we must treat you, I see,</div>
      <div class="line">To cure this pestilent human nature.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What will you do?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_77">77</span><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">In your left eye, first,</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll scratch you a bit, till you see awry;</div>
      <div class="line">But all that you see will seem fine and brave.</div>
      <div class="line">And then I’ll just cut your right window-pane out——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are you drunk?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Lays a number of sharp instruments on the table.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">See, here are the glazier’s tools.</div>
      <div class="line">Blinkers you’ll wear, like a raging bull.</div>
      <div class="line">Then you’ll recognise that your bride is lovely,—</div>
      <div class="line">And ne’er will your vision be troubled, as now,</div>
      <div class="line">With bell-cows harping and sows that dance.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This is madman’s talk!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Oldest Courtier.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">It’s the Dovrë-King speaking;</div>
      <div class="line">’Tis he that is wise, and ’tis you that are crazy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Just think how much worry and mortification</div>
      <div class="line">You’ll thus escape from, year out, year in.</div>
      <div class="line">You must remember, your eyes are the fountain</div>
      <div class="line">Of the bitter and searing lye of tears.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That’s true; and it says in our sermon-book:</div>
      <div class="line">If thine eye offend thee, then pluck it out.</div>
      <div class="line">But tell me, when will my sight heal up</div>
      <div class="line">Into human sight?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_78">78</span><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Nevermore, my friend.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Indeed! In that case, I’ll take my leave.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What would you without?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">I would go my way.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, stop! It’s easy to slip in here,</div>
      <div class="line">But outward the Dovrë-King’s gate opens not.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You wouldn’t detain me by force, I hope?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come now, just listen to reason, Prince Peer!</div>
      <div class="line">You have gifts for trolldom. He acts—does he not?—</div>
      <div class="line">Even now in a passably troll-like fashion?</div>
      <div class="line">And you’d fain be a troll?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Yes, I would, sure enough.</div>
      <div class="line">For a bride, and a well-managed kingdom to boot,</div>
      <div class="line">I can put up with losing a good many things.</div>
      <div class="line">But there is a limit to all things on earth.</div>
      <div class="line">The tail I’ve accepted, it’s perfectly true;</div>
      <div class="line">But no doubt I can loose what the Chamberlain tied.</div>
      <div class="line">My breeches I’ve dropped; they were old and patched;</div>
      <div class="line">But no doubt I can button them on again.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_79">79</span>And lightly enough I can slip my cable</div>
      <div class="line">From these your Dovrëfied ways of life.</div>
      <div class="line">I am willing to swear that a cow is a maid;</div>
      <div class="line">An oath one can always eat up again;—</div>
      <div class="line">But to know that one never can free oneself,</div>
      <div class="line">That one can’t even die like a decent soul;</div>
      <div class="line">To live as a hill-troll for all one’s days—</div>
      <div class="line">To feel that one never can beat a retreat,—</div>
      <div class="line">As the book has it, that’s what your heart is set on;</div>
      <div class="line">But that is a thing I can never agree to.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now, sure as I live, I shall soon lose my temper;</div>
      <div class="line">And then I am not to be trifled with.</div>
      <div class="line">You pasty-faced loon! Do you know who I am?</div>
      <div class="line">First with my daughter you make too free——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There you lie in your throat!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">You must marry her.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Do you dare to accuse me——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">What? Can you deny</div>
      <div class="line">That you lusted for her in heart and eye?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a snort of contempt.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No more? Who the deuce cares a straw for that?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s ever the same with this humankind.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_80">80</span>The spirit you’re ready to own with your lips,</div>
      <div class="line">But in fact nothing counts that your fists cannot handle.</div>
      <div class="line">So you really think, then, that lust matters nought?</div>
      <div class="line">Wait; you shall soon have ocular proof of it——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You don’t catch me with a bait of lies!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Green-clad One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My Peer, ere the year’s out, your child will be born.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Open doors! let me go!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">In a he-goat’s skin.</div>
      <div class="line">You shall have the brat after you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Mopping the sweat off his brow.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in35">Would I could waken!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Shall we send him to the palace?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in33">You can send him to the parish!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well well, Prince Peer; that’s your own look-out.</div>
      <div class="line">But one thing’s certain, what’s done is done;</div>
      <div class="line">And your offspring, too, will be sure to grow;</div>
      <div class="line">Such mongrels shoot up amazingly fast——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_81">81</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Old man, don’t act like a headstrong ox!</div>
      <div class="line">Hear reason, maiden! Let’s come to terms.</div>
      <div class="line">You must know I’m neither a prince nor rich;—</div>
      <div class="line">And whether you measure or whether you weigh me,</div>
      <div class="line">Be sure you won’t gain much by making me yours.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">The Green-clad One</span> is taken ill, and is
carried out by <span class="sc">Troll-maids</span>.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Looks at him for a while in high disdain; then says</i>:]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Dash him to shards on the rock-walls, children!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Troll-imps.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh dad, mayn’t we play owl-and-eagle first!</div>
      <div class="line">The wolf-game! Grey-mouse and glow-eyed cat!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, but quick. I am worried and sleepy. Goodnight!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>He goes.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hunted by the <span class="sc">Troll-imps</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let me be, devil’s imps!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Tries to escape up the chimney.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Imps.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Come brownies! Come nixies!</div>
      <div class="line">Bite him behind!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Ow!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Tries to slip down the cellar trap-door.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Imps.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Shut up all the crannies!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_82">82</span><span class="sc">The Troll-courtier.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now the small-fry are happy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Struggling with a little <span class="sc">Imp</span> that has bit himself</i></div>
    <div><i>fast to his ear.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Let go will you, <a id="corr82.6"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="beast">beast!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_82.6"><ins class="correction" title="beast">beast!</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Courtier.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hitting him across the fingers.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Gently, you scamp, with a scion of royalty!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A rat-hole——!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Runs to it.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Imps.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Be quick, Brother Nixie, and block it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The old one was bad, but the youngsters are worse!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Imps.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Slash him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Oh, would I were small as a mouse!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Rushing around.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Imps.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Swarming round him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Close the ring! Close the ring!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Weeping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">Were I only a louse!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>He falls.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Imps.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now into his eyes!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_83">83</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Buried in a heap of <span class="sc">Imps</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Mother, help me, I <a id="corr83.3"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="die">die!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_83.3"><ins class="correction" title="die">die!</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Church bells sound far away.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Imps.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Bells in the mountain! The Black-Frock’s cows!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">The Trolls</span> take to flight, amid a confused
uproar of yells and shrieks. The palace
collapses; everything disappears.</i></p>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE SEVENTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>Pitch darkness.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> is heard beating and slashing about him
with a large bough.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Answer! Who are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Voice in the Darkness.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Myself.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Clear the way!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Go roundabout, Peer! The hill’s roomy enough.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Tries to force a passage at another place, but strikes</i></div>
    <div><i>against something.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who are <em class="gesperrt">you</em>?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Myself. Can you say the same?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_84">84</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I can say what I will; and my sword can smite!</div>
      <div class="line">Mind yourself! Hu, hei, now the blow falls crushing!</div>
      <div class="line">King Saul slew hundreds; Peer Gynt slew thousands!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Cutting and slashing.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Who <em class="gesperrt">are</em> you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Myself.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">That stupid reply</div>
      <div class="line">You may spare; it doesn’t clear up the matter.</div>
      <div class="line"><em class="gesperrt">What</em> are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">The great Boyg.<a id="r54"></a><a href="#f54" class="c012"><sup>[54]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Ah, indeed!</div>
      <div class="line">The riddle was black; now I’d call it grey.</div>
      <div class="line">Clear the way then, Boyg!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">Go roundabout, Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, through!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Cuts and slashes.</i></div>
      <div class="line in13">There he fell!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Tries to advance, but strikes against something.</i></div>
      <div class="line in28">Ho ho, are there more here?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Boyg, Peer Gynt! the one only <a id="corr84.29"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="one">one.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_84.29"><ins class="correction" title="one">one.</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_85">85</span>It’s the Boyg that’s unwounded, and the Boyg that was hurt,</div>
      <div class="line">It’s the Boyg that is dead, and the Boyg that’s alive.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Throws away the branch.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The weapon is troll-smeared;<a id="r55"></a><a href="#f55" class="c012"><sup>[55]</sup></a> but I have my fists!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Fights his way forward.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, trust to your fists, lad, trust to your body.</div>
      <div class="line">Hee-hee, Peer Gynt, so you’ll reach the summit.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Falling back again.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Forward or back, and it’s just as far;—</div>
      <div class="line">Out or in, and it’s just as strait!<a id="r56"></a><a href="#f56" class="c012"><sup>[56]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">He is <em class="gesperrt">there</em>! And <em class="gesperrt">there</em>! And he’s round the bend!</div>
      <div class="line">No sooner I’m out than I’m back in the ring.—</div>
      <div class="line">Name who you are! Let me see you! What are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Boyg.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Groping around.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Not dead, not living; all slimy; misty.</div>
      <div class="line">Not so much as a shape! It’s as bad as to battle</div>
      <div class="line">In a cluster of snarling, half-wakened bears!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Screams.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Strike back at me, can’t you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_86">86</span><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">The Boyg isn’t mad.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Strike!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">The Boyg strikes not.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Fight! You shall!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The great Boyg conquers, but does not fight.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Were there only a nixie here that could prick me!</div>
      <div class="line">Were there only as much as a year-old troll!</div>
      <div class="line">Only something to fight with. But here there is nothing.—</div>
      <div class="line">Now he’s snoring! Boyg!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">What’s your will?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in42">Use force!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The great Boyg conquers in all things without it.<a id="r57"></a><a href="#f57" class="c012"><sup>[57]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Biting his own arms and hands.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Claws and ravening teeth in my flesh!</div>
      <div class="line">I must feel the drip of my own warm blood.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>A sound is heard like the wing-strokes of
great birds.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_87">87</span><span class="sc">Bird-cries.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Comes he now, Boyg?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Ay, step by step.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Bird-cries.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All our sisters far off! Gather here to the tryst!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If you’d save me now, lass, you must do it quick!</div>
      <div class="line">Gaze not adown so, lowly and bending.—</div>
      <div class="line">Your clasp-book! Hurl it straight into his eyes!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Bird-cries.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He totters!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">We have him.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Bird-cries.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Sisters! Make haste!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Too dear the purchase one pays for life</div>
      <div class="line">In such a heart-wasting hour of strife.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Sinks down.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Bird-cries.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Boyg, there he’s fallen! Seize him! Seize him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>A sound of bells and of psalm-singing is
heard far away.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Boyg.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shrinks up to nothing, and says in a gasp</i>:]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He was too strong. There were women behind him.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_88">88</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE EIGHTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c028"><i>Sunrise. The mountain-side in front of <span class="sc">Åse’s</span> sæter.
The door is shut; all is silent and deserted.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> is lying asleep by the wall of the sæter.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Wakens, and looks about him with dull and heavy</i></div>
    <div><i>eyes. He spits.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What wouldn’t I give for a pickled herring!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Spits again, and at the same moment catches
sight of <span class="sc">Helga</span>, who appears carrying a
basket of food.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ha, child, are you there? What is it you want?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Helga.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It is Solveig——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Jumping up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Where is <em class="gesperrt">she</em>?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Helga.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">Behind the sæter.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Unseen.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If you come nearer, I’ll run away!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stopping short.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Perhaps you’re afraid I might take you in my arms?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_89">89</span><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">For shame!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Do you know where I was last night?—</div>
      <div class="line">Like a horse-fly the Dovrë-King’s daughter is after me.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Then it was well that the bells were set ringing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt’s not the lad they can lure astray.—</div>
      <div class="line">What do you say?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Helga.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Crying.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Oh, she’s running away!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Running after her.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Wait!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Catches her by the arm.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in6">Look here, what I have in my pocket!</div>
      <div class="line">A silver button, child! You shall have it,—</div>
      <div class="line">Only speak for me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Helga.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Let me be; let me go!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There you have it.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Helga.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Let go; there’s the basket of food.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">God pity you if you don’t——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_90">90</span><span class="sc">Helga.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Uf, how you scare me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Gently; letting her go.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, I only meant: beg her not to forget me!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i><span class="sc">Helga</span> runs off.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f43">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r43">43</a>. See note on page <a href="#f38">35</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f44">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r44">44</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Blir der Helg når en dig ser?”</span> literally, “Does it become
a holy-day (or holy-tide) when one sees you?”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f45">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r45">45</a>. A malevolent water-monster.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f46">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r46">46</a>. <i>Sæter</i>—a châlet, or small mountain farm, where the cattle
are sent to pasture in the summer months.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f47">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r47">47</a>. See note, p. <a href="#f32">29</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f48">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r48">48</a>. See Appendix.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f49">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r49">49</a>. Pronounce <i>Vaal-fyeld</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f50">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r50">50</a>. Pronounce Broasë.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f51">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r51">51</a>. Kicking the rafters is a much-admired exploit in peasant
dancing. See note, page <a href="#f34">30</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f52">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r52">52</a>. Literally, “Better than our reputation.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f53">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r53">53</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Ustyggelig stygt.”</span> <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Ustyggelig”</span> seems to be what Mr. Lewis Carroll
calls a portmanteau word, compounded of
“usigelig” = unspeakable, and “styg” = ugly. The words
might be rendered “beyond grimness grim.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f54">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r54">54</a>. See Introduction and Appendix.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f55">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r55">55</a>. Rendered harmless by magical anointing.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f56">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r56">56</a>. </p>
<div class="lg-container-b c014">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Atter og fram, det er lige langt;—</span></div>
      <div class="line"><span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">ud og ind, det er lige trangt!”</span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f57">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r57">57</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Med lempe,”</span> literally “by gentleness” or “easy-goingness.”
“Quiescence” is somewhere near the idea.</p>
</div>
<hr class="c018" />

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_91">91</span>
  <h2 class="c008">ACT THIRD.</h2>
</div>

<h3 class="c027">SCENE FIRST.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>Deep in the pine-woods. Grey autumn weather. Snow
is falling.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> stands in his shirt-sleeves, felling timber.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hewing at a large fir-tree with twisted branches.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh ay, you are tough, you ancient churl;</div>
      <div class="line">But it’s all in vain, for you’ll soon be down.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hews at it again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I see well enough you’ve a chain-mail shirt,</div>
      <div class="line">But I’ll hew it through, were it never so stout.—</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, ay, you’re shaking your twisted arms;</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve reason enough for your spite and rage;</div>
      <div class="line">But none the less you must bend the knee——!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Breaks off suddenly.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Lies! ’Tis an old tree and nothing more.</div>
      <div class="line">Lies! It was never a steel-clad churl;</div>
      <div class="line">It’s only a fir-tree with fissured bark.—</div>
      <div class="line">It is heavy labour this hewing timber;</div>
      <div class="line">But the devil and all when you hew and dream too.—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll have done with it all—with this dwelling in mist,</div>
      <div class="line">And, broad-awake, dreaming your senses away.—</div>
      <div class="line">You’re an outlaw, lad! You are banned to the woods.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hews for a while rapidly.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Ay, an outlaw, ay. You’ve no mother now</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_92">92</span>To spread your table and bring your food.</div>
      <div class="line">If you’d eat, my lad, you must help yourself,</div>
      <div class="line">Fetch your rations raw from the wood and stream,</div>
      <div class="line">Split your own fir-roots[<a id="r58"></a><a href="#f58" class="c012"><sup>[58]</sup></a> and light your own fire,</div>
      <div class="line">Bustle around, and arrange and prepare things.</div>
      <div class="line">Would you clothe yourself warmly, you must stalk your deer;</div>
      <div class="line">Would you found you a house, you must quarry the stones;</div>
      <div class="line">Would you build up its walls, you must fell the logs,</div>
      <div class="line">And shoulder them all to the building-place.—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>His axe sinks down; he gazes straight in</i></div>
      <div class="line"><i>front of him.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Brave shall the building be. Tower and vane</div>
      <div class="line">Shall rise from the roof-tree, high and fair.</div>
      <div class="line">And then I will carve, for the knob on the gable,</div>
      <div class="line">A mermaid, shaped like a fish from the navel.</div>
      <div class="line">Brass shall there be on the vane and the door-locks.</div>
      <div class="line">Glass I must see and get hold of too.</div>
      <div class="line">Strangers, passing, shall ask amazed:</div>
      <div class="line">What is that glittering far on the hillside?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Laughs angrily.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Devil’s own lies! There they come again.</div>
      <div class="line">You’re an outlaw, lad!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hewing vigorously.</i></div>
      <div class="line in23">A bark-thatched hovel</div>
      <div class="line">Is shelter enough both in rain and frost.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks up at the tree.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Now he stands wavering. There; only a kick,</div>
      <div class="line">And he topples and measures his length on the ground;—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_93">93</span>The thick-swarming undergrowth shudders around him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Begins lopping the branches from the
trunk; suddenly he listens, and stands
motionless with his axe in the air.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There’s some one after me;—Ay, are you that sort,</div>
      <div class="line">Old Hegstad-churl; would you play me false?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Crouches behind the tree, and peeps over it.</i></div>
      <div class="line">A lad! One only. He seems afraid.</div>
      <div class="line">He peers all round him. What’s that he hides</div>
      <div class="line">’Neath his jacket? A sickle. He stops and looks round,—</div>
      <div class="line">Now he lays his hand on a fence-rail flat.</div>
      <div class="line">What’s this now?  Why does he lean like that——?</div>
      <div class="line">Ugh, ugh! Why, he’s chopped his finger off!</div>
      <div class="line">A whole finger off!—He bleeds like an ox.—</div>
      <div class="line">Now he takes to his heels with his fist in a clout.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Rises.</i></div>
      <div class="line">What a devil of a lad! An unmendable<a id="r59"></a><a href="#f59" class="c012"><sup>[59]</sup></a> finger!</div>
      <div class="line">Right off!  And with no one compelling him to it!</div>
      <div class="line">Ho, now I remember! It’s only thus</div>
      <div class="line">You can ’scape from having to serve the King.</div>
      <div class="line">That’s it. They wanted to send him soldiering,</div>
      <div class="line">And of course the lad didn’t want to go.—</div>
      <div class="line">But to chop off——? To sever for good and all——?</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, think of it—wish it done—will it to boot,—</div>
      <div class="line">But do it——! No, that’s past my understanding!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Shakes his head a little; then goes on with
his work.</i></p>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_94">94</span>
  <h3 class="c027">SCENE SECOND.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c022"><i>A room in <span class="sc">Åse’s</span> house. Everything in disorder; boxes
standing open; wearing apparel strewn around.
A cat is lying on the bed.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Åse</span> and the <span class="sc">Cottar’s Wife</span> are hard at work packing
things together and putting them straight.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Running to one side.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Kari, come here!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">What now?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>On the other side.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Come here——?</div>
      <div class="line">Where is——? Where shall I find——? Tell me where——?</div>
      <div class="line">What am I seeking? I’m out of my wits!</div>
      <div class="line">Where is the key of the chest?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in31">In the key hole.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What is that rumbling?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">The last cart-load</div>
      <div class="line">They’re driving to Hegstad.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Weeping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">How glad I’d be</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_95">95</span>In the black chest myself to be driven away!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, what must a mortal abide and live through!</div>
      <div class="line">God help me in mercy; The whole house is bare!</div>
      <div class="line">What the Hegstad-churl left now the Bailiff<a id="r60"></a><a href="#f60" class="c012"><sup>[60]</sup></a> has taken.</div>
      <div class="line">Not even the clothes on my back have they spared.</div>
      <div class="line">Fie! Shame on them all that have judged so hardly!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Seats herself on the edge of the bed.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Both the land and the farm-place are lost to our line;</div>
      <div class="line">The old man was hard, but the law was still harder;—</div>
      <div class="line">There was no one to help me, and none would show mercy;</div>
      <div class="line">Peer was away; not a soul to give counsel.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But here, in this house, you may dwell till you die.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, the cat and I live on charity.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">God help you, mother; your Peer’s cost you dear.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer? Why, you’re out of your senses, sure!</div>
      <div class="line">Ingrid came home none the worse in the end.</div>
      <div class="line">The right thing had been to hold Satan to reckoning;—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_96">96</span>He was the sinner, ay, he and none other;</div>
      <div class="line">The ugly beast tempted my poor boy <a id="corr96.2"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="astray">astray!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_96.2"><ins class="correction" title="astray">astray!</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Had I not better send word to the parson?</div>
      <div class="line">Mayhap you’re worse than you think you are.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To the parson? Truly I almost think so.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Starts up.</i></div>
      <div class="line">But, oh God, I can’t! I’m the boy’s own mother;</div>
      <div class="line">And help him I must; it’s no more than my duty;</div>
      <div class="line">I must do what I can when the rest forsake him.</div>
      <div class="line">They’ve left him his coat; I must patch it up.</div>
      <div class="line">I wish I dared snap up the fur-rug as well!</div>
      <div class="line">What’s come of the hose?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">They are there, ’mid that rubbish.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Rummaging about.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, what have we here? I declare it’s an old</div>
      <div class="line">Casting-ladle, Kari! With this he would play</div>
      <div class="line">Button-moulder, would melt, and then shape, and then stamp them.</div>
      <div class="line">One day—there was company—in the boy came,</div>
      <div class="line">And begged of his father a lump of tin.</div>
      <div class="line">“Not tin,” says Jon, “but King Christian’s coin;</div>
      <div class="line">Silver; to show you’re the son of Jon Gynt.”</div>
      <div class="line">God pardon him, Jon; he was drunk, you see,</div>
      <div class="line">And then he cared neither for tin nor for gold.</div>
      <div class="line">Here are the hose. Oh, they’re nothing but holes;</div>
      <div class="line">They want darning, Kari!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_97">97</span><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Indeed but they do.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">When that is done, I must get to bed;</div>
      <div class="line">I feel so broken, and frail, and ill——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Joyfully.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Two woollen-shirts, Kari;—they’ve passed them by!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">So they have indeed.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">It’s a bit of luck.</div>
      <div class="line">One of the two you may put aside;</div>
      <div class="line">Or rather, I think we’ll e’en take them both;—</div>
      <div class="line">The one he has on is so worn and thin.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But oh, Mother Åse, I fear it’s a <a id="corr97.17"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="sin">sin.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_97.17"><ins class="correction" title="sin">sin.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Maybe; but remember the priest holds out</div>
      <div class="line">Pardon for this and our other sinnings.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE THIRD.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>In front of a settlers newly-built hut in the forest.
A reindeer’s horns over the door. The snow is
lying deep around. It is dusk.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> is standing outside the door, fastening a
large wooden bar to it.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Laughing between whiles.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Bars I must fix me; bars that can fasten</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_98">98</span>The door against troll-folk, and men, and women.</div>
      <div class="line">Bars I must fix me; bars that can shut out</div>
      <div class="line">All the cantankerous little hobgoblins.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">They come with the darkness, they knock and they rattle:</div>
      <div class="line">Open, Peer Gynt, we’re as nimble as thoughts are!</div>
      <div class="line in2">’Neath the bedstead we bustle, we rake in the ashes,</div>
      <div class="line">Down the chimney we hustle like fiery-eyed dragons.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Hee-hee! Peer Gynt; think you staples and planks</div>
      <div class="line">Can shut out cantankerous hobgoblin-thoughts?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">Solveig</span> comes on snow-shoes over the
heath; she has a shawl over her head,
and a bundle in her hand.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">God prosper your labour. You must not reject me.</div>
      <div class="line">You sent for me hither, and so you must take me.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Solveig! It cannot be——! Ay, but it is!—</div>
      <div class="line">And you’re not afraid to come near to me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">One message you sent me by little Helga;</div>
      <div class="line">Others came after in storm and in stillness.</div>
      <div class="line">All that your mother told bore me a message,</div>
      <div class="line">That brought forth others when dreams sank upon me.</div>
      <div class="line">Nights full of heaviness, blank, empty days,</div>
      <div class="line">Brought me the message that now I must come.</div>
      <div class="line">It seemed as though life had been quenched down there;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_99">99</span>I could nor laugh nor weep from the depths of my heart.</div>
      <div class="line">I knew not for sure how you might be minded;</div>
      <div class="line">I knew but for sure what I should do and must do.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But your father?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">In all of God’s wide earth</div>
      <div class="line">I have none I can call either father or mother.</div>
      <div class="line">I have loosed me from all of them.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Solveig, you fair one—</div>
      <div class="line">And to come to me?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Ay, to you alone;</div>
      <div class="line">You must be all to me, friend and consoler.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>In tears.</i></div>
      <div class="line">The worst was leaving my little sister;—</div>
      <div class="line">But parting from father was worse, still worse;</div>
      <div class="line">And worst to leave her at whose breast I was borne;—</div>
      <div class="line">Oh no, God forgive me, the worst I must call</div>
      <div class="line">The sorrow of leaving them all, ay all!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And you know the doom that was passed in spring?</div>
      <div class="line">It forfeits my farm and my heritage.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Think you for heritage, goods, and gear,</div>
      <div class="line">I forsook the paths all my dear ones tread?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_100">100</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And know you the compact? Outside the forest</div>
      <div class="line">Whoever may meet me may seize me at will.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I ran upon snow-shoes; I asked my way on;</div>
      <div class="line">They said “Whither go you?” I answered, “I go home.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Away, away then with nails and planks!</div>
      <div class="line">No need now for bars against hobgoblin-thoughts.</div>
      <div class="line">If you dare dwell with the hunter here,</div>
      <div class="line">I know the hut will be blessed from ill.</div>
      <div class="line">Solveig! Let me look at you! Not too near!</div>
      <div class="line">Only look at you! Oh, but you are bright and pure!</div>
      <div class="line">Let me lift you! Oh, but you are fine and light!</div>
      <div class="line">Let me carry you, Solveig, and I’ll never be tired!</div>
      <div class="line">I will not soil you. With outstretched arms</div>
      <div class="line">I will hold you far out from me, lovely and warm one!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, who would have thought I could draw you to me,—</div>
      <div class="line">Ah, but I have longed for you, daylong and nightlong.</div>
      <div class="line">Here you may see I’ve been hewing and building;—</div>
      <div class="line">It must down again, dear; it is ugly and mean——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Be it mean or brave,—here is all to my mind.</div>
      <div class="line">One so lightly draws breath in the teeth of the wind.</div>
      <div class="line">Down below it was airless; one felt as though choked;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_101">101</span>That was partly what drove me in fear from the dale.</div>
      <div class="line">But here, with the fir-branches soughing o’erhead,—</div>
      <div class="line">What a stillness and song!—I am here in my home.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And know you that surely? For all your days?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The path I have trodden leads back nevermore.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You are mine then! In! In the room let me see you!</div>
      <div class="line">Go in! I must go to fetch fir-roots<a id="r61"></a><a href="#f61" class="c012"><sup>[61]</sup></a> for fuel.</div>
      <div class="line">Warm shall the fire be and bright shall it shine,</div>
      <div class="line">You shall sit softly and never be a-cold.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He opens the door; <span class="sc">Solveig</span> goes in. He
stands still for a while, then laughs aloud
with joy and leaps into the air.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My king’s daughter! Now I have found her and won her!</div>
      <div class="line">Hei! Now the palace shall rise, deeply founded!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024"><i>He seizes his axe and moves away; at the same
moment an <span class="sc">Old-looking Woman</span>, in a tattered
green gown, comes out from the wood; an <span class="sc">Ugly
Brat</span>, with an ale-flagon in his hand, limps after,
holding on to her skirt.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good evening, Peer Lightfoot!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_102">102</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">What is it? Who’s there?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Old friends of yours, Peer Gynt! My home is near by.</div>
      <div class="line">We are neighbours.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Indeed! That is more than I know.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Even as your hut was builded, mine built itself too.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Going.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’m in haste——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Yes, that you are always, my lad!</div>
      <div class="line">But I’ll trudge behind you and catch you at last.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re mistaken, good woman!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">I was so before;</div>
      <div class="line">I was when you promised such mighty fine things.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I promised——? What devil’s own nonsense is this?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’ve forgotten the night when you drank with my sire?</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve forgot——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_103">103</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">I’ve forgot what I never have known.</div>
      <div class="line">What’s this that you prate of? When last did we meet?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">When last we met was when first we met.</div>
      <div class="c010">[<i>To <span class="sc">The Brat</span>.</i>]</div>
      <div class="line">Give your father a drink; he is thirsty, I’m sure.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Father? You’re drunk, woman! Do you call him——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I should think you might well know the pig by its skin!</div>
      <div class="line">Why, where are your eyes? Can’t you see that he’s lame</div>
      <div class="line">In his shank, just as you too are lame in your soul?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Would you have me believe——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Would you wriggle away——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This long-leggëd urchin——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">He’s shot up apace.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Dare you, you troll-snout, father on me——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_104">104</span><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come now, Peer Gynt, you’re as rude as an ox!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Weeping.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Is it my fault if no longer I’m fair,</div>
      <div class="line">As I was when you lured me on hillside and lea?</div>
      <div class="line">Last fall, in my labour, the Fiend held my back,</div>
      <div class="line">And so ’twas no wonder I came out a fright.</div>
      <div class="line">But if you would see me as fair as before,</div>
      <div class="line">You have only to turn yonder girl out of doors,</div>
      <div class="line">Drive her clean out of your sight and your mind;—</div>
      <div class="line">Do but this, dear my love, and I’ll soon lose my snout!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Begone from me, troll-witch!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Ay, see if I do!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ll split your skull open——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Just try if you dare!</div>
      <div class="line">Ho-ho, Peer Gynt, I’ve no fear of blows!</div>
      <div class="line">Be sure I’ll return every day of the year.</div>
      <div class="line">Through the door, set ajar, I’ll peep in at you both.</div>
      <div class="line">When you’re sitting with your girl on the fireside bench,—</div>
      <div class="line">When you’re tender, Peer Gynt,—when you’d pet and caress her,—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll seat myself by you, and ask for my share.</div>
      <div class="line">She there and I—we will take you by turns.</div>
      <div class="line">Farewell, dear my lad, you can marry to-morrow!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You nightmare of hell!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_105">105</span><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">By-the-bye, I forgot!</div>
      <div class="line">You must rear your own youngster, you light-footed scamp!</div>
      <div class="line">Little imp, will you go to your father?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Brat.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Spits at him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in36">Faugh!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll chop you with my hatchet; only wait, only wait!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Kisses <span class="sc">The Brat</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What a head he has got on his shoulders, the dear!</div>
      <div class="line">You’ll be dad’s living image when once you’re a man!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stamping.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, would you were as far——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">As we now are near?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Clenching his hands.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And all this——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">For nothing but thoughts and desires!</div>
      <div class="line">It is hard on you, Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">It is worst for another!—</div>
      <div class="line">Solveig, my fairest, my purest gold!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_106">106</span><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh ay, ’tis the guiltless must smart, said the devil:</div>
      <div class="line">His mother boxed his ears when his father was drunk!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>She trudges off into the thicket with <span class="sc">The
Brat</span>, who throws the flagon at <span class="sc">Peer
Gynt</span>.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>After a long silence.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Boyg said, “Go roundabout!”—so one must here.—</div>
      <div class="line">There fell my fine palace, with crash and clatter!</div>
      <div class="line">There’s a wall around her whom I stood so near,</div>
      <div class="line">Of a sudden all’s ugly—my joy has grown old.—</div>
      <div class="line">Roundabout, lad! There’s no way to be found</div>
      <div class="line">Right through all this, from where you stand to her.</div>
      <div class="line">Right through? H’m, surely there should be one.</div>
      <div class="line">There’s a text on repentance, unless I mistake.</div>
      <div class="line">But what? What is it? I haven’t the book,</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve forgotten it mostly, and here there is none</div>
      <div class="line">That can guide me aright in the pathless wood.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">Repentance? And maybe ’twould take whole years</div>
      <div class="line">Ere I fought my way through. ’Twere a meagre life, that.</div>
      <div class="line">To shatter what’s radiant, and lovely, and pure,</div>
      <div class="line">And clinch it together in fragments and shards?</div>
      <div class="line">You can do it with a fiddle, but not with a bell.</div>
      <div class="line">Where you’d have the sward green, you must mind not to trample.</div>
      <div class="line in2">’Twas nought but a lie though, that witch-snout business!</div>
      <div class="line">Now all that foulness is well out of sight.—</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, out of sight maybe, but not out of mind.</div>
      <div class="line">Thoughts will sneak stealthily in at my heel.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_107">107</span>Ingrid! And the three, they that danced on the heights!</div>
      <div class="line">Will they too want to join us? With vixenish spite</div>
      <div class="line">Will they claim to be folded, like her, to my breast,</div>
      <div class="line">To be tenderly lifted on outstretched arms?</div>
      <div class="line">Roundabout, lad; though my arms were as long</div>
      <div class="line">As the root of the fir, or the pine-tree’s stem,—</div>
      <div class="line">I think even then I should hold her too near</div>
      <div class="line">To set her down pure and untarnished again.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">I must roundabout here, then, as best I may,</div>
      <div class="line">And see that it bring me nor gain nor loss.</div>
      <div class="line">One must put such things from one, and try to forget.—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Goes a few steps towards the hut, but stops
again.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Go in after this?  So befouled and disgraced?</div>
      <div class="line">Go in with that troll-rabble after me still?</div>
      <div class="line">Speak, yet be silent; confess, yet conceal——?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Throws away his axe.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It’s a holy-day evening. For me to keep tryst,</div>
      <div class="line">Such as now I am, would be sacrilege.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In the doorway.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are you coming?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Half aloud.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Roundabout!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">What?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in34">You must wait.</div>
      <div class="line">It is dark, and I’ve got something heavy to fetch.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_108">108</span><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Wait; I will help you; the burden we’ll share.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, stay where you are! I must bear it alone.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But don’t go too far, dear!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Be patient, my girl;</div>
      <div class="line">Be my way long or short—you must wait.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Nodding to him as he goes.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in34">Yes, I’ll wait!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> goes down the wood-path.
<span class="sc">Solveig</span> remains standing in the open
half-door.</i></p>
</div>
<h3 class="c021">SCENE FOURTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i><span class="sc">Åse’s</span> room. Evening. The room is lighted by a wood
fire on the open hearth. A cat is lying on a chair
at the foot of the bed.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Åse</span> lies in the bed, fumbling about restlessly with her
hands on the coverlet.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, Lord my God, isn’t he coming?</div>
      <div class="line in2">The time drags so drearily on.</div>
      <div class="line">I have no one to send with a message;</div>
      <div class="line in2">And I’ve much, oh so much, to say.</div>
      <div class="line">I haven’t a moment to lose now!</div>
      <div class="line in2">So quickly! Who could have foreseen</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_109">109</span>Oh me, if I only were certain</div>
      <div class="line in2">I’d not been too strict with him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Enters.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good evening!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">The Lord give you gladness!</div>
      <div class="line in2">You’ve come then, my boy, my dear!</div>
      <div class="line">But how dare you show face in the valley?</div>
      <div class="line in2">You know your life’s forfeit here.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, life must e’en go as it may go;</div>
      <div class="line in2">I felt that I must look in.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, now Kari is put to silence,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And I can depart in peace!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Depart? Why, what are you saying?</div>
      <div class="line in2">Where is it you think to go?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Alas, Peer, the end is nearing;</div>
      <div class="line in2">I have but a short time left.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Writhing, and walking towards the back of the room.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">See there now! I’m fleeing from trouble;</div>
      <div class="line in2">I thought at least <em class="gesperrt">here</em> I’d be free——!</div>
      <div class="line">Are your hands and your feet a-cold, then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Ay, Peer; all will soon be o’er.—</div>
      <div class="line">When you see that my eyes are glazing,</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_110">110</span>You must close them carefully.</div>
      <div class="line">And then you must see to my coffin;</div>
      <div class="line in2">And be sure it’s a fine one, dear.</div>
      <div class="line">Ah no, by-the-bye——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Be quiet!</div>
      <div class="line in2">There’s time yet to think of that.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, ay.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks restlessly round the room.</i></div>
      <div class="line in8">Here you see the little</div>
      <div class="line in2">They’ve left us! It’s like them, just.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a writhe.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Again!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Harshly.</i></div>
      <div class="line in7">Well, I know it was my fault.</div>
      <div class="line in2">What’s the use of reminding me?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You! No, that accursed liquor,</div>
      <div class="line in2">From that all the mischief came!</div>
      <div class="line">Dear my boy, you know you’d been drinking;</div>
      <div class="line in2">And then no one knows what he does;</div>
      <div class="line">And besides, you’d been riding the reindeer;</div>
      <div class="line in2">No wonder your head was turned!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, ay; of that yarn enough now.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Enough of the whole affair.</div>
      <div class="line">All that’s heavy we’ll let stand over</div>
      <div class="line in2">Till after—some other day.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Sits on the edge of the bed.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Now, mother, we’ll chat together;</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_111">111</span>But only of this and that,—</div>
      <div class="line">Forget what’s awry and crooked,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And all that is sharp and sore.—</div>
      <div class="line">Why see now, the same old pussy</div>
      <div class="line in2">So she is alive then, still?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">She makes such a noise o’ nights now;</div>
      <div class="line in2">You know what that bodes, my boy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div><i>Changing the subject.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What news is there here in the parish?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Smiling.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">There’s somewhere about, they say,</div>
      <div class="line">A girl who would fain to the uplands——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hastily.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Mads Moen, is he content?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">They say that she hears and heeds not</div>
      <div class="line in2">The old people’s prayers and tears.</div>
      <div class="line">You ought to look in and see them;—</div>
      <div class="line in2">You, Peer, might perhaps bring help——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The smith, what’s become of him now?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Don’t talk of that filthy smith.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_112">112</span>Her name I would rather tell you,</div>
      <div class="line in2">The name of the girl, you know——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Nay, now we will chat together,</div>
      <div class="line in2">But only of this and that,—</div>
      <div class="line">Forget what’s awry and crooked,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And all that is sharp and sore.</div>
      <div class="line">Are you thirsty? I’ll fetch you water.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Can you stretch you? The bed is short.</div>
      <div class="line">Let me see;—if I don’t believe, now,</div>
      <div class="line in2">It’s the bed that I had when a boy!</div>
      <div class="line">Do you mind, dear, how oft in the evenings</div>
      <div class="line in2">You sat at my bedside here,</div>
      <div class="line">And spread the fur-coverlet o’er me,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And sang many a lilt and lay?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, mind you? And then we played sledges,</div>
      <div class="line in2">When your father was far abroad.</div>
      <div class="line">The coverlet served for sledge-apron,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And the floor for an ice-bound fiord.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, but the best of all, though,—</div>
      <div class="line in2">Mother, you mind that too?</div>
      <div class="line">The best was the fleet-foot horses——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Ay, think you that I’ve forgot?—</div>
      <div class="line">It was Kari’s cat that we borrowed;</div>
      <div class="line in2">It sat on the log-scooped chair——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To the castle west of the moon, and</div>
      <div class="line in2">The castle east of the sun,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_113">113</span>To Soria-Moria Castle</div>
      <div class="line in2">The road ran both high and low.</div>
      <div class="line">A stick that we found in the closet,</div>
      <div class="line in2">For a whip-shaft you made it serve.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Right proudly I perked on the box-seat——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Ay, ay; you threw loose the reins,</div>
      <div class="line">And kept turning round as we travelled,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And asked me if I was cold.</div>
      <div class="line">God bless you, ugly old mother,—</div>
      <div class="line in2">You were ever a kindly soul——!</div>
      <div class="line">What’s hurting you now?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">My back aches,</div>
      <div class="line in2">Because of the hard, bare boards.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Stretch yourself; I’ll support you.</div>
      <div class="line in2">There now, you’re lying soft.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Uneasily.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, Peer, I’d be moving!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Moving?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Ay, moving; ’tis ever my wish.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, nonsense! Spread o’er you the bed-fur.</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_114">114</span>Let me sit at your bedside here.</div>
      <div class="line">There; now we’ll shorten the evening</div>
      <div class="line in2">With many a lilt and lay.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Best bring from the closet the prayer-book:</div>
      <div class="line in2">I feel so uneasy of soul.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">In Soria-Moria Castle</div>
      <div class="line in2">The King and the Prince give a feast.</div>
      <div class="line">On the sledge-cushions lie and rest you;</div>
      <div class="line in2">I’ll drive you there over the heath——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But, Peer dear, am I invited?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Ay, that we are, both of us.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He throws a string round the back of the
chair on which the cat is lying, takes up a
stick, and seats himself at the foot of the
bed.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Gee-up! Will you stir yourself, Black-boy?</div>
      <div class="line in2">Mother, you’re not a-cold?</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, ay; by the pace one knows it,</div>
      <div class="line in2">When Granë<a id="r62"></a><a href="#f62" class="c012"><sup>[62]</sup></a> begins to go!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, Peer, what is it that’s ringing——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">The glittering sledge-bells, dear!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_115">115</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, mercy, how hollow it’s rumbling</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">We’re just driving over a fiord.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’m afraid! What is that I hear rushing</div>
      <div class="line in2">And sighing so strange and wild?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s the sough of the pine-trees, mother,</div>
      <div class="line in2">On the heath. Do you but sit still.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There’s a sparkling and gleaming afar now;</div>
      <div class="line in2">Whence comes all that blaze of light.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">From the castle’s windows and doorways.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Don’t you hear, they are dancing?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in36">Yes.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Outside the door stands St. Peter,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And prays you to enter in.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Does he greet us?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">He does, with honour,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And pours out the sweetest wine.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Wine! Has he cakes as well, Peer?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_116">116</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Cakes? Ay, a heaped-up dish.</div>
      <div class="line">And the dean’s wife<a id="r63"></a><a href="#f63" class="c012"><sup>[63]</sup></a> is getting ready</div>
      <div class="line in2">Your coffee and your dessert.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Lord, Lord! shall we two come together?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">As freely as ever you will.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, deary, Peer, what a frolic</div>
      <div class="line in2">You’re driving me to, poor soul!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Cracking his whip.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Gee-up; will you stir yourself, Black-boy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Peer, dear, you’re driving right?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Cracking his whip again.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, broad is the way.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">This journey,</div>
      <div class="line in2">It makes me so weak and tired.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There’s the castle rising before us;</div>
      <div class="line in2">The drive will be over soon.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_117">117</span><span class="sc">Åse.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I will lie back and close my eyes then,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And trust me to you, my boy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come up with you, Granë, my trotter!</div>
      <div class="line in2">In the castle the throng is great;</div>
      <div class="line">They bustle and swarm to the gateway:</div>
      <div class="line in2">Peer Gynt and his mother are here!</div>
      <div class="line">What say you, Master Saint Peter?</div>
      <div class="line in2">Shall mother not enter in?</div>
      <div class="line">You may search a long time, I tell you,</div>
      <div class="line in2">Ere you find such an honest old soul.</div>
      <div class="line">Myself I don’t want to speak of;</div>
      <div class="line in2">I can turn at the castle gate.</div>
      <div class="line">If you’ll treat me, I’ll take it kindly;</div>
      <div class="line in2">If not, I’ll go off just as pleased.</div>
      <div class="line">I have made up as many flim-flams</div>
      <div class="line in2">As the devil at the pulpit desk,</div>
      <div class="line">And called my old mother a hen, too,</div>
      <div class="line in2">Because she would cackle and crow.</div>
      <div class="line">But her you shall honour and reverence,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And make her at home indeed;</div>
      <div class="line">There comes not a soul to beat her</div>
      <div class="line in2">From the parishes nowadays.—</div>
      <div class="line">Ho-ho; here comes God the Father!</div>
      <div class="line in2">Saint Peter! you’re in for it now!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>In a deep voice.</i></div>
      <div class="line">“Have done with these jack-in-office airs, sir;</div>
      <div class="line in2">Mother Åse shall enter free!”</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Laughs loudly, and turns towards his mother.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Ay, didn’t I know what would happen?</div>
      <div class="line">Now they dance to another tune!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Uneasily.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Why, what makes your eyes so glassy?</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_118">118</span>Mother! Have you gone out of your wits——?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes to the head of the bed.</i></div>
      <div class="line">You mustn’t lie there and stare so——!</div>
      <div class="line in2">Speak, mother; it’s I, your boy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Feels her forehead and hands cautiously;
then throws the string on the chair, and
says softly</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, ay!—You can rest yourself, Granë;</div>
      <div class="line in2">For e’en now the journey’s done.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Closes her eyes, and bends over her.</i></div>
      <div class="line">For all of your days I thank you,</div>
      <div class="line in2">For beatings and lullabys!</div>
      <div class="line">But see, you must thank me back, now—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Presses his cheek against her mouth.</i></div>
      <div class="line in2">There; that was the driver’s fare.<a id="r64"></a><a href="#f64" class="c012"><sup>[64]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cottar’s Wife.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Entering.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What? Peer! Ah, then we are over</div>
      <div class="line in2">The worse of the sorrow and need!</div>
      <div class="line">Dear Lord, but she’s sleeping soundly—</div>
      <div class="line in2">Or can she be——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Hush; she is dead.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">Kari</span> weeps besides the body; <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>
walks up and down the room for some
time; at last he stops beside the bed.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">See mother buried with honour.</div>
      <div class="line in2">I must try to fare forth from here.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are you faring afar?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_119">119</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">To seaward.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Kari.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">So far!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">Ay, and further still.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>He goes.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f58">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r58">58</a>. “Tyri,” resinous pine-wood which burns with a bright
blaze.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f59">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r59">59</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Umistelig”</span>—unlosable, indispensable, irreplaceable.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f60">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r60">60</a>. “Lensmand,” the lowest functionary in the Norwegian
official scale—a sort of parish officer.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f61">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r61">61</a>. See note, p. <a href="#f58">92</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f62">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r62">62</a>. Granë (Grani) was the name of Sigurd Fafnirsbane’s horse,
descended from Odin’s Sleipnir. Sigurd’s Granë was grey;
Peer Gynt calls his “Svarten,” Black-boy, or Blackey.—See the
“Volsunga Saga,” translated by Morris and Magnussen.
Camelot edition, p. 43.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f63">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r63">63</a>. “Salig provstinde,” literally “the late Mrs. Provost.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f64">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r64">64</a>. <i><span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">Tak for skyds</span></i>, literally “thanks for the drive.”</p>
</div>
<hr class="c018" />

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_120">120</span>
  <h2 class="c008">ACT FOURTH</h2>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FIRST.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>On the south-west coast of Morocco. A palm-grove.
Under an awning, on ground covered with matting,
a table spread for dinner. Further back in
the grove hammocks are slung. In the offing lies
a steam-yacht, flying the Norwegian and American
colours. A jolly-boat drawn up on the beach. It
is towards sunset.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>, a handsome middle-aged gentleman, in
an elegant travelling-dress, with a gold-rimmed
double eyeglass hanging at his waistcoat, is doing
the honours at the head of the table. <span class="sc">Mr. Cotton</span>,</i><a id="r65"></a><a href="#f65" class="c012"><sup>[65]</sup></a>
<i><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon</span>, <span class="sc">Herr von Eberkopf</span>, and
<span class="sc">Herr Trumpeterstråle</span>,</i><a id="r66"></a><a href="#f66" class="c012"><sup>[66]</sup></a> <i>are seated at the table
finishing dinner.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Drink, gentlemen! If man is made</div>
      <div class="line">For pleasure, let him take his fill then.</div>
      <div class="line">You know ’tis written: Lost is lost,</div>
      <div class="line">And gone is gone——. What may I hand you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">As host you’re princely, Brother Gynt!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_121">121</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I share the honour with my cash,</div>
      <div class="line">With cook and steward——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">Very well;<a id="r67"></a><a href="#f67" class="c012"><sup>[67]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Let’s pledge a toast to all the four!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Monsieur,<a id="r68"></a><a href="#f68" class="c012"><sup>[68]</sup></a> you have a <i>gout</i>,<a href="#f68" class="c012"><sup>[68]</sup></a> a <i>ton</i>,<a href="#f68" class="c012"><sup>[68]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">That nowadays is seldom met with</div>
      <div class="line">Among men living <i>en garçon</i>,—<a href="#f68" class="c012"><sup>[68]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">A certain—what’s the word——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">A dash,</div>
      <div class="line">A tinge of free soul-contemplation,</div>
      <div class="line">And cosmopolitanisation,<a id="r69"></a><a href="#f69" class="c012"><sup>[69]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">An outlook through the cloudy rifts</div>
      <div class="line">By narrow prejudice unhemmed,</div>
      <div class="line">A stamp of high illumination,</div>
      <div class="line">An <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de"><i>Ur-Natur</i></span>,<a href="#f68" class="c012"><sup>[68]</sup></a> with lore of life,</div>
      <div class="line">To crown the trilogy, united.</div>
      <div class="line"><span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de"><i>Nicht wahr</i></span>, Monsieur, ’twas that you meant?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, very possible; not quite</div>
      <div class="line">So loftily it sounds in French.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><i>Ei was!</i><a id="r70"></a><a href="#f70" class="c012"><sup>[70]</sup></a> That language is so stiff.—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_122">122</span>But the phenomenon’s final cause</div>
      <div class="line">If we would seek——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">It’s found already.</div>
      <div class="line">The reason is that I’m unmarried.</div>
      <div class="line">Yes, gentlemen, <a id="corr122.6"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="compelety">completely</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_122.6"><ins class="correction" title="compelety">completely</ins></a></span> clear</div>
      <div class="line">The matter is. What should a man be?</div>
      <div class="line">Himself, is my concise reply.</div>
      <div class="line">He should regard himself and his.</div>
      <div class="line">But can he, as a sumpter-mule<a id="r71"></a><a href="#f71" class="c012"><sup>[71]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">For others’ woe and others’ weal?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But this same in-and-for-yourself-ness,</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll answer for’t, has cost you strife——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah yes, indeed; in former days;</div>
      <div class="line">But always I came off with honour.</div>
      <div class="line">Yet one time I ran very near</div>
      <div class="line">To being trapped against my will.</div>
      <div class="line">I was a brisk and handsome lad,</div>
      <div class="line">And she to whom my heart was given,</div>
      <div class="line">She was of royal family——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Of royal——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Carelessly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">One of those old stocks,</div>
      <div class="line">You know the kind——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Thumping the table.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Those <a id="corr122.31"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="noble-trolls">noble-trolls.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_122.31"><ins class="correction" title="noble-trolls">noble-trolls.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_123">123</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shrugging his shoulders</i>.]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Old fossil Highnesses who make it</div>
      <div class="line">Their pride to keep plebeian blots</div>
      <div class="line">Excluded from their line’s escutcheon.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Then nothing came of the affair?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The family opposed the marriage?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Far from it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Ah!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With forbearance</i>.]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">You understand</div>
      <div class="line">That certain circumstances made for</div>
      <div class="line">Their marrying us without delay.</div>
      <div class="line">But truth to tell, the whole affair</div>
      <div class="line">Was, first to last, distasteful to me.</div>
      <div class="line">I’m finical in certain ways,</div>
      <div class="line">And like to stand on my own feet.</div>
      <div class="line">And when my father-in-law came out</div>
      <div class="line">With delicately veiled demands</div>
      <div class="line">That I should change my name and station,</div>
      <div class="line">And undergo ennoblement,</div>
      <div class="line">With much else that was most distasteful,</div>
      <div class="line">Not to say quite inacceptable.—</div>
      <div class="line">Why then I gracefully withdrew,</div>
      <div class="line">Point-blank declined his ultimatum—</div>
      <div class="line">And so renounced my youthful bride.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Drums on the table with a devout air.</i></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_124">124</span>Yes, yes; there is a ruling Fate!</div>
      <div class="line">On that we mortals may rely;</div>
      <div class="line">And ’tis a comfortable knowledge.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And so the matter ended, eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh no, far otherwise I found it;</div>
      <div class="line">For busy-bodies mixed themselves,</div>
      <div class="line">With furious outcries, in the business.</div>
      <div class="line">The juniors of the clan were worst;</div>
      <div class="line">With seven of them I fought a duel.</div>
      <div class="line">That time I never shall forget,</div>
      <div class="line">Though I came through it all in safety.</div>
      <div class="line">It cost me blood; but that same blood</div>
      <div class="line">Attests the value of my person,</div>
      <div class="line">And points encouragingly towards</div>
      <div class="line">The wise control of Fate aforesaid.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Your outlook on the course of life</div>
      <div class="line">Exalts you to the rank of thinker.</div>
      <div class="line">Whilst the mere commonplace empiric</div>
      <div class="line">Sees separately the scattered scenes,</div>
      <div class="line">And to the last goes groping on,</div>
      <div class="line">You in one glance can focus all things.</div>
      <div class="line">One norm<a id="r72"></a><a href="#f72" class="c012"><sup>[72]</sup></a> to all things you apply.</div>
      <div class="line">You point each random rule of life,</div>
      <div class="line">Till one and all diverge like rays</div>
      <div class="line">From one full-orbed philosophy.—</div>
      <div class="line">And you have never been to college?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I am, as I’ve already said,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_125">125</span>Exclusively a self-taught man.</div>
      <div class="line">Methodically naught I’ve learned;</div>
      <div class="line">But I have thought and speculated,</div>
      <div class="line">And done much desultory reading.</div>
      <div class="line">I started somewhat late in life,</div>
      <div class="line">And then, you know, it’s rather hard</div>
      <div class="line">To plough ahead through page on page,</div>
      <div class="line">And take in all of everything.</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve done my history piecemeal;</div>
      <div class="line">I never have had time for more.</div>
      <div class="line">And, as one needs in days of trial</div>
      <div class="line">Some certainty to place one’s trust in,</div>
      <div class="line">I took religion intermittently.</div>
      <div class="line">That way it goes more smoothly down.</div>
      <div class="line">One should not read to swallow all,</div>
      <div class="line">But rather see what one has use for.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, that is practical!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Lights a cigar.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Dear <a id="corr125.21"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="friends">friends,</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_125.21"><ins class="correction" title="friends">friends,</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line">Just think of my career in general.</div>
      <div class="line">In what case came I to the West?</div>
      <div class="line">A poor young fellow, empty-handed;</div>
      <div class="line">I had to battle sore for bread;</div>
      <div class="line">Trust me, I often found it hard.</div>
      <div class="line">But life, my friends, ah, life is dear,</div>
      <div class="line">And, as the phrase goes, death is bitter.</div>
      <div class="line">Well! Luck, you see, was kind to me;</div>
      <div class="line">Old Fate, too, was accommodating.</div>
      <div class="line">I prospered; and, by versatility,</div>
      <div class="line">I prospered better still and better.</div>
      <div class="line">In ten years’ time I bore the name</div>
      <div class="line">Of Crœsus ’mongst the Charleston shippers.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_126">126</span>My fame flew wide from port to port,</div>
      <div class="line">And fortune sailed on board my vessels——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What did you trade in?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">I did most</div>
      <div class="line">In negro slaves for Carolina,</div>
      <div class="line">And idol-images for China.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><i>Fi donc!</i></span><a id="r73"></a><a href="#f73" class="c012"><sup>[73]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">The devil, Uncle Gynt!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You think, no doubt, the business hovered</div>
      <div class="line">On the outer verge of the allowable?</div>
      <div class="line">Myself I felt the same thing keenly.</div>
      <div class="line">It struck me even as odious.</div>
      <div class="line">But, trust me, when you’ve once begun,</div>
      <div class="line">It’s hard to break away again.</div>
      <div class="line">At any rate it’s no light thing,</div>
      <div class="line">In such a vast trade-enterprise,</div>
      <div class="line">That keeps whole thousands in employ,</div>
      <div class="line">To break off wholly, once for all.</div>
      <div class="line">That “once for all” I can’t abide,</div>
      <div class="line">But own, upon the other side,</div>
      <div class="line">That I have always felt respect</div>
      <div class="line">For what are known as consequences;</div>
      <div class="line">And that to overstep the bounds</div>
      <div class="line">Has ever somewhat daunted me.</div>
      <div class="line">Besides, I had begun to age.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_127">127</span>Was getting on towards the fifties;—</div>
      <div class="line">My hair was slowly growing grizzled;</div>
      <div class="line">And, though my health was excellent,</div>
      <div class="line">Yet painfully the thought beset me:</div>
      <div class="line">Who knows how soon the hour may strike,</div>
      <div class="line">The jury-verdict be delivered</div>
      <div class="line">That parts the sheep and goats asunder?</div>
      <div class="line in2">What could I do? To stop the trade</div>
      <div class="line">With China was impossible.</div>
      <div class="line">A plan I hit on—opened straightway</div>
      <div class="line">A new trade with the self-same land.</div>
      <div class="line">I shipped off idols every spring,</div>
      <div class="line">Each autumn sent forth missionaries,</div>
      <div class="line">Supplying them with all they needed,</div>
      <div class="line">As stockings, Bibles, rum, and rice——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, at a profit?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Why, of course.</div>
      <div class="line">It prospered. Dauntlessly they toiled.</div>
      <div class="line">For every idol that was sold</div>
      <div class="line">They got a coolie well baptized,</div>
      <div class="line">So that the effect was neutralised.</div>
      <div class="line">The mission-field lay never fallow,</div>
      <div class="line">For still the idol-propaganda</div>
      <div class="line">The missionaries held in check.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, but the African <a id="corr127.28"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="commodies">commodities</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_127.28"><ins class="correction" title="commodies">commodities</ins></a></span>?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There, too, my ethics won the day.</div>
      <div class="line">I saw the traffic was a wrong one</div>
      <div class="line">For people of a certain age.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_128">128</span>One may drop off before one dreams of it.</div>
      <div class="line">And then there were the thousand pitfalls</div>
      <div class="line">Laid by the philanthropic camp;</div>
      <div class="line">Besides, of course, the hostile cruisers,</div>
      <div class="line">And all the wind-and-weather risks.</div>
      <div class="line">All this together won the day.</div>
      <div class="line">I thought: Now, Peter,<a id="r74"></a><a href="#f74" class="c012"><sup>[74]</sup></a> reef your sails:</div>
      <div class="line">See to it you amend your faults!</div>
      <div class="line">So in the South I bought some land,</div>
      <div class="line">And kept the last meat-importation,</div>
      <div class="line">Which chanced to be a superfine one.</div>
      <div class="line">They throve so, grew so fat and sleek,</div>
      <div class="line">That ’twas a joy to me, and them too.</div>
      <div class="line">Yes, without boasting, I may say</div>
      <div class="line">I acted as a father to them,—</div>
      <div class="line">And found my profit in so doing.</div>
      <div class="line">I built them schools, too, so that virtue</div>
      <div class="line">Might uniformly be maintained at</div>
      <div class="line">A certain general <i>niveau</i>,<a href="#f74" class="c012"><sup>[74]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">And kept strict watch that never its</div>
      <div class="line">Thermometer should sink below it.</div>
      <div class="line">Now, furthermore, from all this business</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve beat a definite retreat;—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve sold the whole plantation, and</div>
      <div class="line">It’s tale of live-stock, hide and hair.</div>
      <div class="line">At parting, too, I served around,</div>
      <div class="line">To big and little, gratis grog,<a href="#f74" class="c012"><sup>[74]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">So men and women all got drunk,</div>
      <div class="line">And widows got their snuff as well.</div>
      <div class="line">So that is why I trust,—provided</div>
      <div class="line">The saying is not idle breath:</div>
      <div class="line">Whoso does not do ill, does good,—</div>
      <div class="line">My former errors are forgotten,</div>
      <div class="line">And I, much more than most, can hold</div>
      <div class="line">My misdeeds balanced by my virtues.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_129">129</span><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Clinking glasses with him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How strengthening it is to hear</div>
      <div class="line">A principle thus acted out,</div>
      <div class="line">Freed from the night of theory,</div>
      <div class="line">Unshaken by the outward ferment!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Who has been drinking freely during the preceding</i></div>
    <div><i>passages.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We Northland men know how to carry</div>
      <div class="line">Our battle through! The key to the art</div>
      <div class="line">Of life’s affairs is simply this:</div>
      <div class="line">To keep one’s ear close shut against</div>
      <div class="line">The ingress of one dangerous viper.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What sort of viper, pray, dear friend?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A little one that slyly wiles you</div>
      <div class="line">To tempt the irretrievable.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Drinking again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">The essence of the art of daring,</div>
      <div class="line">The art of bravery in act,</div>
      <div class="line">Is this: To stand with choice-free foot</div>
      <div class="line">Amid the treacherous snares of life,—</div>
      <div class="line">To know for sure that other days</div>
      <div class="line">Remain beyond the day of battle,—</div>
      <div class="line">To know that ever in the rear</div>
      <div class="line">A bridge for your retreat stands open.</div>
      <div class="line">This theory has borne me on,</div>
      <div class="line">Has given my whole career its colour;</div>
      <div class="line">And this same theory I inherit,</div>
      <div class="line">A race-gift, from my childhood’s home.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_130">130</span><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You are Norwegian?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Yes, by birth;</div>
      <div class="line">But cosmopolitan in spirit.</div>
      <div class="line">For fortune such as I’ve enjoyed</div>
      <div class="line">I have to thank America.</div>
      <div class="line">My amply-furnished library</div>
      <div class="line">I owe to Germany’s later schools.</div>
      <div class="line">From France, again, I get my waistcoats,</div>
      <div class="line">My manners, and my spice of wit,—</div>
      <div class="line">From England an industrious hand,</div>
      <div class="line">And keen sense for my own advantage.</div>
      <div class="line">The Jew has taught me how to wait.</div>
      <div class="line">Some taste for <i>dolce far niente</i><a id="r75"></a><a href="#f75" class="c012"><sup>[75]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">I have received from Italy,—</div>
      <div class="line">And one time, in a perilous pass,</div>
      <div class="line">To eke the measure of my days,</div>
      <div class="line">I had recourse to Swedish steel.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Lifting up his glass.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, Swedish steel——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">The weapon’s wielder</div>
      <div class="line">Demands our homage first of all!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They clink glasses and drink with him.
The wine begins to go to his head.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All this is very good indeed;—</div>
      <div class="line">But, sir,<a href="#f75" class="c012"><sup>[75]</sup></a> I’m curious to know</div>
      <div class="line">What with your gold you think of doing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_131">131</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Smiling.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">H’m; doing? Eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">All Four.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Coming closer.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Yes, let us hear!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, first of all, I want to travel.</div>
      <div class="line">You see, that’s why I shipped you four,</div>
      <div class="line">To keep me company, at Gibraltar.</div>
      <div class="line">I needed such a dancing-choir</div>
      <div class="line">Of friends around my gold-calf-altar——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Most witty!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">Well, but no one hoists</div>
      <div class="line">His sails for nothing but the sailing.</div>
      <div class="line">Beyond all doubt, you have a goal;</div>
      <div class="line">And that is——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">To be Emperor.<a id="r76"></a><a href="#f76" class="c012"><sup>[76]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">All Four.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Nodding.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in6">Emperor!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Four.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">Where?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_132">132</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">O’er all the world.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But how, friend——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">By the might of gold!</div>
      <div class="line">That plan is not at all a new one;</div>
      <div class="line">It’s been the soul of my career.</div>
      <div class="line">Even as a boy, I swept in dreams</div>
      <div class="line">Far o’er the ocean on a cloud.</div>
      <div class="line">I soared with train and golden scabbard,—</div>
      <div class="line">And flopped down on all-fours again.</div>
      <div class="line">But still my goal, my friends, stood fast.—</div>
      <div class="line">There is a text, or else a saying,</div>
      <div class="line">Somewhere, I don’t remember where,</div>
      <div class="line">That if you gained the whole wide world,</div>
      <div class="line">But lost <em class="gesperrt">yourself</em>, your gain were but</div>
      <div class="line">A garland on a cloven skull.</div>
      <div class="line">That is the text—or something like it;</div>
      <div class="line">And that remark is sober truth.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But what then is the Gyntish Self?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The world behind my forehead’s arch,</div>
      <div class="line">In force of which I’m no one else</div>
      <div class="line">Than I, no more than God’s the Devil.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I understand now where you’re aiming!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thinker sublime!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_133">133</span><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Exalted poet!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>More and more elevated.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Gyntish Self—it is the host</div>
      <div class="line">Of wishes, appetites, desires,—</div>
      <div class="line">The Gyntish Self, it is the sea</div>
      <div class="line">Of fancies, exigencies, claims,</div>
      <div class="line">All that, in short, makes <em class="gesperrt">my</em> breast heave,</div>
      <div class="line">And whereby I, as I, exist.</div>
      <div class="line">But as our Lord requires the clay</div>
      <div class="line">To constitute him God o’ the world,</div>
      <div class="line">So I, too, stand in need of gold,</div>
      <div class="line">If I as Emperor would figure.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You have the gold, though?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Not enough.</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, maybe for a nine-days’ flourish,</div>
      <div class="line">As Emperor <i>à la</i><a id="r77"></a><a href="#f77" class="c012"><sup>[77]</sup></a> Lippe-Detmold.</div>
      <div class="line">But I must be myself <i>en bloc</i>,<a href="#f77" class="c012"><sup>[77]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Must be the Gynt of all the planet,</div>
      <div class="line">Sir Gynt<a href="#f77" class="c012"><sup>[77]</sup></a> throughout, from top to bottom!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Enraptured.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Possess the earth’s most exquisite beauty!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All century-old Johannisberger!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_134">134</span><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And all the blades of Charles the Twelfth!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But first a profitable opening</div>
      <div class="line">For business——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">That’s already found;</div>
      <div class="line">Our anchoring here supplied me with it.</div>
      <div class="line">To-night we set off, northward ho!</div>
      <div class="line">The papers I received on board</div>
      <div class="line">Have brought me tidings of importance——.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Rises with uplifted glass.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It seems that Fortune ceaselessly</div>
      <div class="line">Aids him who has the pluck to seize it——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Guests.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well? Tell us——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Greece is in revolt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">All Four.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Springing up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What! Greece——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">The Greeks have risen in Hellas.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Four.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hurrah!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">And Turkey’s in a fix!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Empties his glass.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To Hellas! Glory’s gate stands open!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll help them with the sword of France!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_135">135</span><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And I with war-whoops—from a distance.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And I as well—by taking contracts!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Lead on! I’ll find again in Bender</div>
      <div class="line">The world-renowned spur-strap-buckles!<a id="r78"></a><a href="#f78" class="c012"><sup>[78]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Falling on <span class="sc">Peer Gynt’s</span> neck.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Forgive me, friend, that I at first</div>
      <div class="line">Misjudged you quite!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pressing his hands.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">I, stupid hound,</div>
      <div class="line">Took you for next door to a scoundrel!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Too strong that; only for a fool——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Trying to kiss him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I, Uncle, for a specimen</div>
      <div class="line">Of Yankee riff-raff’s meanest spawn——!</div>
      <div class="line">Forgive me——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">We’ve been in the dark——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_136">136</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What stuff is this?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">We now see gathered</div>
      <div class="line">In glory all the Gyntish host</div>
      <div class="line">Of wishes, appetites, and desires——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Admiringly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">So this is being Monsieur<a id="r79"></a><a href="#f79" class="c012"><sup>[79]</sup></a> Gynt!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In the same tone.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This I call being Gynt with honour!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But tell me——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Don’t you understand?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">May I be hanged if I begin to!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What? Are you not upon your way</div>
      <div class="line">To join the Greeks, with ship and money——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Contemptuously.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, many thanks! I side with strength,</div>
      <div class="line">And lend my money to the Turks.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Impossible!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_137">137</span><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">Witty, but a jest!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>After a short silence, leaning on a chair and</i></div>
    <div><i>assuming a dignified mien.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come, gentlemen, I think it best</div>
      <div class="line">We part before the last remains</div>
      <div class="line">Of friendship melt away like smoke.</div>
      <div class="line">Who nothing owns will lightly risk it.</div>
      <div class="line">When in the world one scarce commands</div>
      <div class="line">The strip of earth one’s shadow covers,</div>
      <div class="line">One’s born to serve as food for powder.</div>
      <div class="line">But when a man stands safely landed,</div>
      <div class="line">As I do, then his stake is greater.</div>
      <div class="line">Go you to Hellas. I will put you</div>
      <div class="line">Ashore, and arm you gratis too.</div>
      <div class="line">The more you eke the flames of strife,</div>
      <div class="line">The better will it serve my purpose.</div>
      <div class="line">Strike home for freedom and for right!</div>
      <div class="line">Fight! storm! make hell hot for the Turks;—</div>
      <div class="line">And gloriously end your days</div>
      <div class="line">Upon the Janissaries lances.—</div>
      <div class="line">But <i>I</i>—excuse me——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Slaps his pocket.</i></div>
      <div class="line in17">I have cash,</div>
      <div class="line">And am myself, Sir Peter Gynt.<a id="r80"></a><a href="#f80" class="c012"><sup>[80]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Puts up his sunshade, and goes into the
grove, where the hammocks are partly
visible.</i>]</p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The swinish cur!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">No taste for glory——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_138">138</span><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, glory’s neither here nor there;</div>
      <div class="line">But think of the enormous profits</div>
      <div class="line">We’d reap if Greece should free herself.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I saw myself a conqueror,</div>
      <div class="line">By lovely Grecian maids encircled.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Grasped in my Swedish hands, I saw</div>
      <div class="line">The great, heroic spur-strap-buckles!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I my gigantic Fatherland’s</div>
      <div class="line">Culture saw spread o’er earth and sea——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The worst’s the loss in solid cash.</div>
      <div class="line">God dam!<a id="r81"></a><a href="#f81" class="c012"><sup>[81]</sup></a> I scarce can keep from weeping!</div>
      <div class="line">I saw me owner of Olympus.</div>
      <div class="line">If to its fame the mountain answers,</div>
      <div class="line">There must be veins of copper in it,</div>
      <div class="line">That could be opened up again.</div>
      <div class="line">And furthermore, that stream Castalia,<a id="r82"></a><a href="#f82" class="c012"><sup>[82]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Which people talk so much about,</div>
      <div class="line">With fall on fall, at lowest reckoning,</div>
      <div class="line">Must mean a thousand horse-power good——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Still I will go! My Swedish sword</div>
      <div class="line">Is worth far more than Yankee gold!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Perhaps; but, jammed into the ranks,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_139">139</span>Amid the press we’d all be drowned;</div>
      <div class="line">And then where would the profit be?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Accurst! So near to fortune’s summit,</div>
      <div class="line">And now stopped short beside its grave!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shakes his fist towards the yacht.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That long black chest holds coffered up</div>
      <div class="line">The nabob’s golden nigger-sweat——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A royal notion! Quick! Away!</div>
      <div class="line">It’s all up with his empire now!</div>
      <div class="line">Hurrah!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">What would you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Seize the power!</div>
      <div class="line">The crew can easily be bought.</div>
      <div class="line">On board then. I annex the yacht!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You—what——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Von Eberkopf.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">I grab the whole concern!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes down to the jolly-boat.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Mr. Cotton.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why then self-interest commands me</div>
      <div class="line">To grab my share.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes after him.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">What scoundrelism!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_140">140</span><span class="sc">Monsieur Ballon.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A scurvy business—but—<span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><i>enfin</i></span>!<a id="r83"></a><a href="#f83" class="c012"><sup>[83]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Follows the others.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Trumpeterstråle.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ll have to follow, I suppose,—</div>
      <div class="line">But I protest to all the world——!<a id="r84"></a><a href="#f84" class="c012"><sup>[84]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Follows.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE SECOND.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>Another part of the coast. Moonlight with drifting
clouds. The yacht is seen far out, under full
steam.</i></p>

<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> comes running along the beach; now
pinching his arms, now gazing out to sea.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A nightmare!—Delusion!—I’ll soon be awake!</div>
      <div class="line">She’s standing to sea! And at furious speed!—</div>
      <div class="line">Mere delusion! I’m sleeping! I’m dizzy and drunk!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Clenches his hands.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It’s not possible I should be going to die!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Tearing his hair.</i></div>
      <div class="line">A dream! I’m determined it shall be a dream!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, horror! It’s only too real, worse luck!</div>
      <div class="line">My brute-beasts of friends——! Do but hear me, oh Lord!</div>
      <div class="line">Since <a id="corr140.15"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="sic">though</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_140.15"><ins class="correction" title="sic">though</ins></a></span> art so wise and so righteous——! Oh judge——!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>With upstretched arms.</i></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_141">141</span>It is <i>I</i>, Peter<a id="r85"></a><a href="#f85" class="c012"><sup>[85]</sup></a> Gynt! Oh, our Lord, give but heed!</div>
      <div class="line">Hold thy hand o’er me, Father; or else I must perish!</div>
      <div class="line">Make them back the machine! Make them lower the gig!</div>
      <div class="line">Stop the robbers!  Make something go wrong with the rigging!</div>
      <div class="line">Hear me! Let other folks’ business lie over!</div>
      <div class="line">The world can take care of itself for the time!—</div>
      <div class="line">I’m blessed if he hears me! He’s deaf as his wont is!</div>
      <div class="line">Here’s a nice thing! A God that is bankrupt of help!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Beckons upwards.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Hist; I’ve abandoned the nigger-plantation!</div>
      <div class="line">And missionaries I’ve exported to Asia!</div>
      <div class="line">Surely one good turn should be worth another!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, help me on board——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>A jet of fire shoots into the air from the
yacht, followed by thick clouds of smoke;
a hollow report is heard. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>
utters a shriek, and sinks down on the
sands. Gradually the smoke clears away;
the ship has disappeared.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Softly, with a pale face.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">That’s the sword of wrath!</div>
      <div class="line">In a crack to the bottom, every soul, man and mouse!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, for ever blest be the lucky chance——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>With emotion.</i></div>
      <div class="line">A chance? No, no, it was more than a chance.</div>
      <div class="line">I was to be rescued and they to perish.</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, thanks and praise for that thou hast kept me,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_142">142</span>Hast cared for me, spite of all my sins!—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Draws a deep breath.</i></div>
      <div class="line">What a marvellous feeling of safety and peace</div>
      <div class="line">It gives one to know oneself specially shielded!</div>
      <div class="line">But the desert! What about food and drink?</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, something I’m sure to find. <em class="gesperrt">He’ll</em> see to that.</div>
      <div class="line">There’s no cause for alarm;—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Loud and insinuatingly.</i></div>
      <div class="line in30"><em class="gesperrt">He</em> would never allow</div>
      <div class="line">A poor little sparrow like me to perish!</div>
      <div class="line">Be but lowly of spirit. And give him time.</div>
      <div class="line">Leave it all in the Lord’s hands; and don’t be cast down.—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>With a start of terror.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Can that be a lion that growled in the reeds——?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>His teeth chattering.</i></div>
      <div class="line">No, it wasn’t a lion.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Mustering up courage.</i></div>
      <div class="line in22">A lion, forsooth!</div>
      <div class="line">Those beasts, they’ll take care to keep out of the way.</div>
      <div class="line">They know it’s no joke to fall foul of their betters.</div>
      <div class="line">They have instinct to guide them;—they feel, what’s a fact,</div>
      <div class="line">That it’s dangerous playing with elephants.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">But all the same——. I must find a tree.</div>
      <div class="line">There’s a grove of acacias and palms over there;</div>
      <div class="line">If I once can climb up, I’ll be sheltered and safe,—</div>
      <div class="line">Most of all if I knew but a psalm or two.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Clambers up.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Morning and evening are not alike;</div>
      <div class="line">That text has been oft enough weighed and pondered.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Seats himself comfortably.</i></div>
      <div class="line">How blissful to feel so uplifted in spirit!</div>
      <div class="line">To think nobly is more than to know oneself rich.</div>
      <div class="line">Only trust in him. He knows well what share</div>
      <div class="line">Of the chalice of need I can bear to drain.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_143">143</span>He takes fatherly thought for my personal weal;—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Casts a glance over the sea, and whispers with a sigh</i>:</div>
      <div class="line">But economical—no, that he isn’t!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE THIRD.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>Night. An encampment of Moroccan troops on the
edge of the desert. Watch-fires, with <span class="sc">Soldiers</span>
resting by them.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">A Slave.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Enters, tearing his hair.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Gone is the Emperor’s milk-white charger!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another Slave.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Enters, rending his garments.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Emperor’s sacred robes are stolen!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">An Officer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Enters.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A hundred stripes upon the foot-soles</div>
      <div class="line">For all who fail to catch the robber!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>The troopers mount their horses, and gallop
away in every direction.</i></p>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FOURTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>Daybreak. The grove of acacias and palms.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> in his tree with a broken branch in his
hand, trying to beat off a swarm of monkeys.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Confound it! A most disagreeable night.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Laying about him.</i></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_144">144</span>Are you there again? This is most accursëd!</div>
      <div class="line">Now they’re throwing fruit. No, it’s something else.</div>
      <div class="line">A loathsome beast is your Barbary ape!</div>
      <div class="line">The Scripture says: Thou shalt watch and fight.</div>
      <div class="line">But I’m blest if I can; I am heavy and tired,</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Is again attacked; impatiently</i>:</div>
      <div class="line">I must put a stopper upon this nuisance!</div>
      <div class="line">I must see and get hold of one of these scamps,</div>
      <div class="line">Get him hung and skinned, and then dress myself up,</div>
      <div class="line">As best I may, in his shaggy hide,</div>
      <div class="line">That the others may take me for one of themselves.—</div>
      <div class="line">What are we mortals? Motes, no more;</div>
      <div class="line">And it’s wisest to follow the fashion a bit.—</div>
      <div class="line">Again a rabble! They throng and swarm.</div>
      <div class="line">Off with you! Shoo! They go on as though crazy.</div>
      <div class="line">If only I had a false tail to put on now,—</div>
      <div class="line">Only something to make me a bit like a beast.—</div>
      <div class="line">What now?  There’s a pattering over my head——!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks up.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It’s the grandfather ape,—with his fists full of filth——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Huddles together apprehensively, and keeps
still for a while.  The ape makes a
motion; <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> begins coaxing and
wheedling him, as he might a dog.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay,—are you there, my good old Bus!</div>
      <div class="line">He’s a good beast, he is! He will listen to reason!</div>
      <div class="line">He wouldn’t throw;—I should think not, indeed!</div>
      <div class="line">It is me! Pip-pip! We are first-rate friends!</div>
      <div class="line">Ai-ai! Don’t you hear, I can talk your language?</div>
      <div class="line">Bus and I, we are kinsfolk, you see;—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_145">145</span>Bus shall have sugar to-morrow——! The beast!</div>
      <div class="line">The whole cargo on top of me! Ugh, how disgusting!—</div>
      <div class="line">Or perhaps it was food! ’Twas in taste—indefinable;</div>
      <div class="line">And taste’s for the most part a matter of habit.</div>
      <div class="line">What thinker is it who somewhere says:</div>
      <div class="line">You must spit and trust to the force of habit?—</div>
      <div class="line">Now here come the small-fry!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hits and slashes around him.</i></div>
      <div class="line in29">It’s really too bad</div>
      <div class="line">That man, who by rights is the lord of creation,</div>
      <div class="line">Should find himself forced to——! O murder! murder!</div>
      <div class="line">The old one was bad, but the youngsters are worse!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FIFTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>Early morning. A stony region, with a view out over
the desert. On one side a cleft in the hill, and a
cave.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">A Thief</span> and a <span class="sc">Receiver</span> hidden in the cleft, with the
Emperor’s horse and robes. The horse, richly
caparisoned, is tied to a stone. Horsemen are
seen afar off.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Thief.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The tongues of the lances</div>
      <div class="line">All flickering and flashing,—</div>
      <div class="line">See, see!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Receiver.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Already my head seems</div>
      <div class="line">To roll on the sand-plain!</div>
      <div class="line">Woe, woe!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_146">146</span><span class="sc">The Thief.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Folds his arms over his breast.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My father he thieved;</div>
      <div class="line">So his son must be thieving.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Receiver.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My father received;</div>
      <div class="line">Still his son is receiving.<a id="r86"></a><a href="#f86" class="c012"><sup>[86]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Thief.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thy lot shalt thou bear still;</div>
      <div class="line">Thyself shalt thou be still.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Receiver.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Listening.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Steps in the brushwood!</div>
      <div class="line">Flee, flee! But where?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Thief.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The cavern is deep,</div>
      <div class="line">And the Prophet great!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They make off, leaving the booty behind
them. The horsemen gradually disappear
in the distance.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Enters, cutting a reed whistle.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What a delectable morning-tide!—</div>
      <div class="line">The dung-beetle’s rolling his ball in the dust;</div>
      <div class="line">The snail creeps out of his dwelling-house.</div>
      <div class="line">The morning; ay, it has gold in its mouth.—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s a wonderful power, when you think of it,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_147">147</span>That Nature has given to the light of day.</div>
      <div class="line">One feels so secure, and so much more courageous,—</div>
      <div class="line">One would gladly, at need, take a bull by the horns.—</div>
      <div class="line">What a stillness all round! Ah, the joys of Nature,—</div>
      <div class="line">Strange enough I should never have prized them before.</div>
      <div class="line">Why go and imprison oneself in a city,</div>
      <div class="line">For no end but just to be bored by the mob.—</div>
      <div class="line">Just look how the lizards are whisking about,</div>
      <div class="line">Snapping, and thinking of nothing at all.</div>
      <div class="line">What innocence ev’n in the life of the beasts!</div>
      <div class="line">Each fulfils the Creator’s behest unimpeachably,</div>
      <div class="line">Preserving its own special stamp undefaced;</div>
      <div class="line">Is itself, is itself, both in sport and in strife,</div>
      <div class="line">Itself, as it was at his primal: Be!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Puts on his eye-glasses.</i></div>
      <div class="line">A toad. In the middle of a sandstone block.</div>
      <div class="line">Petrifaction all around him. His head alone peering.</div>
      <div class="line">There he’s sitting and gazing as though through a window</div>
      <div class="line">At the world, and is—to himself enough.—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Reflectively.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Enough? To himself——? Where is it that’s written?</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve read it, in youth, in some so-called classic.</div>
      <div class="line">In the family prayer-book? Or Solomon’s Proverbs?</div>
      <div class="line">Alas, I notice that, year by year,</div>
      <div class="line">My memory for dates and for places is fading.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Seats himself in the shade.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Here’s a cool spot to rest and to stretch out one’s feet.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_148">148</span>Why, look, here are ferns growing—edible <a id="corr148.1"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="roots">roots.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_148.1"><ins class="correction" title="roots">roots.</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Eats a little.</i></div>
      <div class="line">’Twould be fitter food for an animal;—</div>
      <div class="line">But the text says: Bridle the natural man!</div>
      <div class="line">Furthermore it is written: The proud shall be humbled,</div>
      <div class="line">And whoso abaseth himself, exalted.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Uneasily.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Exalted? Yes, that’s what will happen with me;—</div>
      <div class="line">No other result can so much as be thought of.</div>
      <div class="line">Fate will assist me away from this place,</div>
      <div class="line">And arrange matters so that I get a fresh start.</div>
      <div class="line">This is only a trial; deliverance will follow,—</div>
      <div class="line">If only the Lord <a id="corr148.12"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="let’s">lets</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_148.12"><ins class="correction" title="let’s">lets</ins></a></span> me keep my health.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Dismisses his misgivings, lights a cigar,
stretches himself, and gazes out over the
desert.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What an enormous, limitless waste!—</div>
      <div class="line">Far in the distance an ostrich is striding.—</div>
      <div class="line">What can one fancy was really God’s</div>
      <div class="line">Meaning in all of this voidness and deadness?</div>
      <div class="line">This desert, bereft of all sources of life;</div>
      <div class="line">This burnt-up cinder, that profits no one;</div>
      <div class="line">This patch of the world, that for ever lies fallow;</div>
      <div class="line">This corpse, that never, since earth’s creation,</div>
      <div class="line">Has brought its Maker so much as thanks,—</div>
      <div class="line">Why was it created?—How spendthrift is Nature!—</div>
      <div class="line">Is that sea in the east there, that dazzling expanse</div>
      <div class="line">All gleaming? It can’t be; ’tis but a mirage.</div>
      <div class="line">The sea’s to the west; it lies piled up behind me,</div>
      <div class="line">Dammed out from the desert by a sloping ridge.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>A thought flashes through his mind.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Dammed out? Then I could——? The ridge is narrow.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_149">149</span>Dammed out? It wants but a gap, a canal,—</div>
      <div class="line">Like a flood of life would the waters rush</div>
      <div class="line">In through the channel, and fill the desert!<a id="r87"></a><a href="#f87" class="c012"><sup>[87]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Soon would the whole of yon red-hot grave</div>
      <div class="line">Spread forth, a breezy and rippling sea.</div>
      <div class="line">The oases would rise in the midst, like islands;</div>
      <div class="line">Atlas would tower in green cliffs on the north;</div>
      <div class="line">Sailing-ships would, like stray birds on the wing,</div>
      <div class="line">Skim to the south, on the caravans’ track.</div>
      <div class="line">Life-giving breezes would scatter the choking</div>
      <div class="line">Vapours, and dew would distil from the clouds.</div>
      <div class="line">People would build themselves town on town,</div>
      <div class="line">And grass would grow green round the swaying palm-trees.</div>
      <div class="line">The southland, behind the Sahara’s wall,</div>
      <div class="line">Would make a new seaboard for civilisation.</div>
      <div class="line">Steam would set Timbuctoo’s factories spinning;</div>
      <div class="line">Bornu would be colonised apace;</div>
      <div class="line">The naturalist would pass safely through Habes</div>
      <div class="line">In his railway-car to the Upper Nile.</div>
      <div class="line">In the midst of my sea, on a fat oasis,</div>
      <div class="line">I will replant the Norwegian race;</div>
      <div class="line">The Dalesman’s blood is next door to royal;</div>
      <div class="line">Arabic crossing will do the rest.</div>
      <div class="line">Skirting a bay, on a shelving strand,</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll build the chief city, Peeropolis.</div>
      <div class="line">The world is decrepit! Now comes the turn</div>
      <div class="line">Of Gyntiana, my virgin land!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Springs up.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Had I but capital, soon ’twould be done.—</div>
      <div class="line">A gold key to open the gate of the sea!</div>
      <div class="line">A crusade against Death! The close-fisted old churl</div>
      <div class="line">Shall open the sack he lies brooding upon.</div>
      <div class="line">Men rave about freedom in every land;—</div>
      <div class="line">Like the ass in the ark, I will send forth a cry</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_150">150</span>O’er the world, and will baptize to liberty</div>
      <div class="line">The beautiful, thrall-bounden coasts that shall be.</div>
      <div class="line">I must on! To find capital, eastward or west!</div>
      <div class="line">My kingdom—well, half of it, say—for a horse!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>The horse in the cleft neighs.</i></div>
      <div class="line">A horse! Ay, and robes!—Jewels too,—and a sword!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes closer.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It can’t be! It is though——! But how? I have read,</div>
      <div class="line">I don’t quite know where, that the will can move mountains;—</div>
      <div class="line">But how about moving a horse as well——?</div>
      <div class="line">Pooh! Here stands the horse, that’s a matter of fact;—</div>
      <div class="line">For the rest, why, <span lang="la" xml:lang="la" xml:lang="la"><i>ab esse ad posse</i></span>, et cetera.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Puts on the dress and looks down at it.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Sir Peter—a Turk, too, from top to toe!</div>
      <div class="line">Well, one never knows what may happen to one.—</div>
      <div class="line">Gee-up, now, Granë, my trusty steed!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Mounts the horse.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Gold-slipper stirrups beneath my feet!—</div>
      <div class="line">You may know the great by their riding-gear!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Gallops off into the desert.</i></div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE SIXTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>The tent of an Arab chief, standing alone on an oasis.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>, in his eastern dress, resting on cushions.
He is drinking coffee, and smoking a long pipe.
<span class="sc">Anitra</span>, and a bevy of <span class="sc">Girls</span>, dancing and
singing before him.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Chorus of Girls.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Prophet is come!</div>
      <div class="line">The Prophet, the Lord, the All-Knowing One,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_151">151</span>To us, to us is he come,</div>
      <div class="line">O’er the sand-ocean riding!</div>
      <div class="line">The Prophet, the Lord, the Unerring One,</div>
      <div class="line">To us, to us is he come,</div>
      <div class="line">O’er the sand-ocean sailing!</div>
      <div class="line in2">Wake the flute and the drum!</div>
      <div class="line">The Prophet, the Prophet is come!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">His courser is white as the milk is</div>
      <div class="line">That streams in the rivers of Paradise.</div>
      <div class="line">Bend every knee! Bow every head!</div>
      <div class="line">His eyes are as bright-gleaming, mild-beaming stars.</div>
      <div class="line">Yet none earth-born endureth</div>
      <div class="line">The rays of those stars in their blinding splendour!</div>
      <div class="line in2">Through the desert he came.</div>
      <div class="line">Gold and pearl-drops sprang forth on his breast.</div>
      <div class="line">Where he rode there was light.</div>
      <div class="line">Behind him was darkness;</div>
      <div class="line">Behind him raged drought and the simoom.</div>
      <div class="line">He, the glorious one, came!</div>
      <div class="line">Through the desert he came,</div>
      <div class="line">Like a mortal apparelled.</div>
      <div class="line">Kaaba, Kaaba stands void;—</div>
      <div class="line">He himself hath proclaimed it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Chorus of Girls.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Wake the flute and the drum!</div>
      <div class="line">The Prophet, the Prophet is come!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>They continue the dance, to soft music.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I have read it in print—and the saying is true—</div>
      <div class="line">That no one’s a prophet in his native land.—</div>
      <div class="line">This position is very much more to my mind</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_152">152</span>Than, my life over there ’mong the Charleston merchants.</div>
      <div class="line">There was something hollow in the whole affair,</div>
      <div class="line">Something foreign at the bottom, something dubious behind it;—</div>
      <div class="line">I was never at home in their company,</div>
      <div class="line">Nor felt myself really one of the guild.</div>
      <div class="line">What tempted me into that galley at all?</div>
      <div class="line">To grub and grub in the bins of trade—</div>
      <div class="line">As I think it all over, I can’t understand it;—</div>
      <div class="line">It <em class="gesperrt">happened</em> so; that’s the whole affair.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">To be oneself on a basis of gold</div>
      <div class="line">Is no better than founding one’s house on the sand.</div>
      <div class="line">For your watch, and your ring, and the rest of your trappings,</div>
      <div class="line">The good people fawn on you, grovelling to earth;</div>
      <div class="line">They lift their hats to your jewelled breast-pin;</div>
      <div class="line">But your ring and your breast-pin are not your Person.—<a id="r88"></a><a href="#f88" class="c012"><sup>[88]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">A prophet; ay, that is a clearer position.</div>
      <div class="line">At least one knows on what footing one stands.</div>
      <div class="line">If you make a success, it’s yourself that receives</div>
      <div class="line">The ovation, and not your pounds-sterling and shillings.<a id="r89"></a><a href="#f89" class="c012"><sup>[89]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">One is what one is, and no nonsense about it;</div>
      <div class="line">One owes nothing to chance or to accident,</div>
      <div class="line">And needs neither licence nor patent to lean on.—</div>
      <div class="line">A prophet; ay, that is the thing for me.</div>
      <div class="line">And I slipped so utterly unawares into it,—</div>
      <div class="line">Just by coming galloping over the desert,</div>
      <div class="line">And meeting these children of nature <i>en route</i>.</div>
      <div class="line">The Prophet had come to them; so much was clear.</div>
      <div class="line">It was really not my intent to deceive——;</div>
      <div class="line">There’s a difference ’twixt lies and oracular answers;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_153">153</span>And then I can always withdraw again.</div>
      <div class="line">I’m in no way bound; it’s a simple matter—;</div>
      <div class="line">The whole thing is private, so to speak;</div>
      <div class="line">I can go as I came; there’s my horse ready saddled;</div>
      <div class="line">I am master, in short, of the situation.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Approaching the tent-door.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Prophet and Master!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">What would my slave?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The sons of the desert await at thy tent-door;</div>
      <div class="line">They pray for the light of thy countenance——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in47">Stop!</div>
      <div class="line">Say in the distance I’d have them assemble;</div>
      <div class="line">Say from the distance I hear all their prayers.</div>
      <div class="line">Add that I suffer no menfolk in here!</div>
      <div class="line in2">Men, my child, are a worthless crew,—</div>
      <div class="line">Inveterate rascals you well may call them!</div>
      <div class="line">Anitra, you can’t think how shamelessly</div>
      <div class="line">They have swind——I mean they have sinned, my child!—<a id="r90"></a><a href="#f90" class="c012"><sup>[90]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Well, enough now of that; you may dance for me, damsels!</div>
      <div class="line">The Prophet would banish the memories that gall him.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Girls.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Dancing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Prophet is good! The Prophet is grieving</div>
      <div class="line">For the ill that the sons of the dust have wrought!</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_154">154</span>The Prophet is mild; to his mildness be praises;</div>
      <div class="line">He opens to sinners his Paradise!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>His eyes following <span class="sc">Anitra</span> during the dance.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Legs as nimble as drumsticks flitting.</div>
      <div class="line">She’s a dainty morsel indeed, that wench!</div>
      <div class="line">It’s true she has somewhat extravagant contours,—</div>
      <div class="line">Not quite in accord with the norms of beauty.</div>
      <div class="line">But what is beauty? A mere convention,—</div>
      <div class="line">A coin made current by time and place.</div>
      <div class="line">And just the extravagant seems most attractive</div>
      <div class="line">When one of the normal has drunk one’s fill.</div>
      <div class="line">In the law-bound one misses all intoxication.</div>
      <div class="line">Either plump to excess or excessively lean;</div>
      <div class="line">Either parlously young or portentously old;—</div>
      <div class="line">The medium is mawkish.—</div>
      <div class="line">Her feet—they are not altogether clean;</div>
      <div class="line">No more are her arms; in especial one of them.</div>
      <div class="line">But that is at bottom no drawback at all.</div>
      <div class="line">I should rather call it a qualification—</div>
      <div class="line">Anitra, come listen!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Approaching</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Thy handmaiden hears!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You are tempting, my daughter! The Prophet is touched.</div>
      <div class="line">If you don’t believe me, then hear the proof;—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll make you a Houri in Paradise!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Impossible, Lord!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_155">155</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">What? You think I am jesting?</div>
      <div class="line">I’m in sober earnest, as true as I live!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But I haven’t a soul.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Then of course you must get one!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How, Lord?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Just leave me alone for that;—</div>
      <div class="line">I shall look after your education.</div>
      <div class="line">No soul? Why, truly you’re not over bright,</div>
      <div class="line">As the saying goes. I’ve observed it with pain.</div>
      <div class="line">But pooh! for a soul you can always find room.</div>
      <div class="line">Come here! let me measure your brain-pan, child.—</div>
      <div class="line">There is room, there is room, I was sure there was.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s true you never will penetrate</div>
      <div class="line">Very deep; to a <em class="gesperrt">large</em> soul you’ll scarcely attain;——</div>
      <div class="line">But never you mind; it won’t matter a bit;—</div>
      <div class="line">You’ll have plenty to carry you through with credit——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Prophet is gracious——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">You hesitate? Speak!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But I’d rather——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Say on; don’t waste time about it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_156">156</span><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I don’t care so much about having a soul;—</div>
      <div class="line">Give me rather——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">What, child?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pointing to his turban.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">That lovely opal!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Enchanted, handing her the jewel.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Anitra! Anitra! true daughter of Eve!</div>
      <div class="line">I feel thee magnetic; for I am a man,</div>
      <div class="line">And, as a much-esteemed author has phrased it:</div>
      <div class="line"><span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">“Das Ewig-Weibliche ziehet uns an!”</span><a id="r91"></a><a href="#f91" class="c012"><sup>[91]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE SEVENTH.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>A moonlight night. The palm-grove outside <span class="sc">Anitra’s</span>
tent.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> is sitting beneath a tree, with an Arabian
lute in his hands. His beard and hair are clipped;
he looks considerably younger.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Plays and sings.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I double-locked my Paradise,</div>
      <div class="line in2">And took its key with me.</div>
      <div class="line">The north-wind bore me seaward ho!</div>
      <div class="line">While lovely women all forlorn</div>
      <div class="line in2">Wept on the ocean strand.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_157">157</span>Still southward, southward clove my keel</div>
      <div class="line in2">The salt sea-currents through.</div>
      <div class="line">Where palms were swaying proud and fair,</div>
      <div class="line">A garland round the ocean-bight,</div>
      <div class="line in2">I set my ship afire.</div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I climbed aboard the desert ship,</div>
      <div class="line in2">A ship on four stout legs.</div>
      <div class="line">It foamed beneath the lashing whip;——</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, catch me; I’m a flitting bird;—</div>
      <div class="line in2">I’m twittering on a bough!</div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Anitra, thou’rt the palm-tree’s must;</div>
      <div class="line in2">That know I now full well!</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, even the Angora goat-milk cheese</div>
      <div class="line">Is scarcely half such dainty fare,</div>
      <div class="line in2">Anitra, ah, as thou!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He hangs the lute over his shoulder, and
comes forward.</i>]</p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Stillness! Is the fair one listening?</div>
      <div class="line">Has she heard my little song?</div>
      <div class="line">Peeps she from behind the curtain,</div>
      <div class="line">Veil and so forth cast aside?—</div>
      <div class="line">Hush! A sound as though a cork</div>
      <div class="line">From a bottle burst amain!</div>
      <div class="line">Now once more! And yet again!</div>
      <div class="line">Love-sighs can it be? or songs?—</div>
      <div class="line">No, it is distinctly snoring.—</div>
      <div class="line">Dulcet strain! Anitra sleepeth!</div>
      <div class="line">Nightingale, thy warbling stay!</div>
      <div class="line">Every sort of woe betide thee,</div>
      <div class="line">If with gurgling trill thou darest—</div>
      <div class="line">But, as says the text: Let be!</div>
      <div class="line">Nightingale, thou art a singer;</div>
      <div class="line">Ah, even such an one am I.</div>
      <div class="line">He, like me, ensnares with music</div>
      <div class="line">Tender, shrinking little <a id="corr157.35"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="hearts">hearts.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_157.35"><ins class="correction" title="hearts">hearts.</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_158">158</span>Balmy night is made for music;</div>
      <div class="line">Music is our common sphere;</div>
      <div class="line">In the act of singing, we are</div>
      <div class="line">We, Peer Gynt and nightingale.</div>
      <div class="line">And the maiden’s very sleeping</div>
      <div class="line">Is my passion’s crowning bliss;—</div>
      <div class="line">For the lips protruded o’er the</div>
      <div class="line">Beaker yet untasted quite——</div>
      <div class="line">But she’s coming, I declare!</div>
      <div class="line">After all, it’s best she should.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>From the tent.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Master, call’st thou in the night?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes indeed, the Prophet calls.</div>
      <div class="line">I was wakened by the cat</div>
      <div class="line">With a furious hunting-hubbub——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, not hunting-noises, Master;</div>
      <div class="line">It was something much, much worse.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What, then, was’t?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Oh, spare me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in33">Speak.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, I blush to——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Approaching.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Was it, mayhap,</div>
      <div class="line">That which filled me so completely</div>
      <div class="line">When I let you have my opal?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_159">159</span><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Horrified.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Liken thee, O earth’s great treasure,</div>
      <div class="line">To a horrible old cat!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Child, from passion’s standpoint viewed,</div>
      <div class="line">May a tom-cat and a prophet</div>
      <div class="line">Come to very much the same.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Master, jest like honey floweth</div>
      <div class="line">From thy lips.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">My little friend,</div>
      <div class="line">You, like other maidens, judge</div>
      <div class="line">Great men by their outsides only.</div>
      <div class="line">I am full of jest at bottom,</div>
      <div class="line">Most of all when we’re alone.</div>
      <div class="line">I am forced by my position</div>
      <div class="line">To assume a solemn mask.</div>
      <div class="line">Duties of the day constrain me;</div>
      <div class="line">All the reckonings and worry</div>
      <div class="line">That I have with one and all,</div>
      <div class="line">Make me oft a cross-grained prophet;</div>
      <div class="line">But it’s only from the tongue out.—</div>
      <div class="line">Fudge, avaunt! <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><i>En tête-à-tête</i></span></div>
      <div class="line">I’m Peer—well, the man I am.</div>
      <div class="line">Hei, away now with the prophet;</div>
      <div class="line">Me, myself, you have me here!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Seats himself under a tree, and draws her to him.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Come, Anitra, we will rest us</div>
      <div class="line">Underneath the palm’s green fan-shade!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll lie whispering, you’ll lie smiling;</div>
      <div class="line">Afterwards our rôles exchange we;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_160">160</span>Then shall your lips, fresh and balmy,</div>
      <div class="line">To my smiling, passion whisper!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Lies down at his feet.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All thy words are sweet as singing,</div>
      <div class="line">Though I understand but little.</div>
      <div class="line">Master, tell me, can thy daughter</div>
      <div class="line">Catch a soul by listening?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Soul, and spirit’s light and knowledge,</div>
      <div class="line">All in good time you shall have them.</div>
      <div class="line">When in east, on rosy streamers</div>
      <div class="line">Golden types print: Here is day,—</div>
      <div class="line">Then, my child, I’ll give you lessons;</div>
      <div class="line">You’ll be well brought up, no fear.</div>
      <div class="line">But, ’mid night’s delicious stillness,</div>
      <div class="line">It were stupid if I should,</div>
      <div class="line">With a threadbare wisdom’s remnants,</div>
      <div class="line">Play the part of pedagogue.—</div>
      <div class="line">And the soul, moreover, is not,</div>
      <div class="line">Looked at properly, the main thing.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s the heart that really matters.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Speak, O Master! When thou speakest,</div>
      <div class="line">I see gleams, as though of opals!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Wisdom in extremes is folly;</div>
      <div class="line">Coward blossoms into tyrant;</div>
      <div class="line">Truth, when carried to excess,</div>
      <div class="line">Ends in wisdom written backwards.</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, my daughter, I’m forsworn</div>
      <div class="line">As a dog if there are not</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_161">161</span>Folk with o’erfed souls on earth</div>
      <div class="line">Who shall scarce attain to clearness.</div>
      <div class="line">Once I met with such a fellow,</div>
      <div class="line">Of the flock the very flower;</div>
      <div class="line">And even he mistook his goal,</div>
      <div class="line">Losing sense in blatant sound.—</div>
      <div class="line">See the waste round this oasis.</div>
      <div class="line">Were I but to swing my turban,</div>
      <div class="line">I could force the ocean-flood</div>
      <div class="line">To fill up the whole concern.</div>
      <div class="line">But I were a blockhead, truly</div>
      <div class="line">Seas and lands to go creating.</div>
      <div class="line">Know you what it is to live?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Teach me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">It is to be wafted</div>
      <div class="line">Dry-shod down the stream of time,</div>
      <div class="line">Wholly, solely as oneself.</div>
      <div class="line">Only in full manhood can I</div>
      <div class="line">Be the man I am, dear child!</div>
      <div class="line">Aged eagle moults his plumage,</div>
      <div class="line">Aged fogey lags declining,</div>
      <div class="line">Aged dame has ne’er a tooth left,</div>
      <div class="line">Aged churl gets withered hands,—</div>
      <div class="line">One and all get withered souls.</div>
      <div class="line">Youth! Ah Youth! I mean to reign,</div>
      <div class="line">As a sultan, whole and fiery,—</div>
      <div class="line">Not on Gyntiana’s shores,</div>
      <div class="line">Under trellised vines and palm-leaves,—</div>
      <div class="line">But enthronëd<a id="r92"></a><a href="#f92" class="c012"><sup>[92]</sup></a> in the freshness</div>
      <div class="line">Of a woman’s virgin thoughts.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">See you now, my little maiden,</div>
      <div class="line">Why I’ve graciously bewitched you,—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_162">162</span>Why I have your heart selected,</div>
      <div class="line">And established, so to speak,</div>
      <div class="line"><em class="gesperrt">There</em> my being’s Caliphate?</div>
      <div class="line">All your longings shall be mine.</div>
      <div class="line">I’m an <i>autocrat</i> in passion!</div>
      <div class="line">You shall live for me alone.</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll be he who shall enthrall</div>
      <div class="line">You like gold and precious stones.</div>
      <div class="line">Should we part, then life is over,—</div>
      <div class="line">That is, <em class="gesperrt">your</em> life, <span lang="la" xml:lang="la" xml:lang="la"><i>nota bene</i></span>!</div>
      <div class="line">Every inch and fibre of you,</div>
      <div class="line">Will-less, without yea or nay,</div>
      <div class="line">I must know filled full of me.</div>
      <div class="line">Midnight beauties of your tresses,</div>
      <div class="line">All that’s lovely to be named,</div>
      <div class="line">Shall, like Babylonian gardens,</div>
      <div class="line">Tempt your Sultan to his tryst.</div>
      <div class="line in2">After all, I don’t complain, then,</div>
      <div class="line">Of your empty forehead-vault.</div>
      <div class="line">With a soul, one’s oft absorbed in</div>
      <div class="line">Contemplation of oneself.</div>
      <div class="line">Listen, while we’re on the subject,—</div>
      <div class="line">If you like it, faith, you shall</div>
      <div class="line">Have a ring about your ankle:—</div>
      <div class="line">’Twill be best for both of us.</div>
      <div class="line"><i>I</i> will be your soul by proxy;</div>
      <div class="line">For the rest—why, <i>status quo</i>.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i><span class="sc">Anitra</span> snores.</i></div>
      <div class="line">What! She sleeps! Then has it glided</div>
      <div class="line">Bootless past her, all I’ve said?—</div>
      <div class="line">No; it marks my influence o’er her</div>
      <div class="line">That she floats away in dreams</div>
      <div class="line">On my love-talk as it flows.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Rises, and lays trinkets in her lap.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Here are jewels! Here are more!</div>
      <div class="line">Sleep, Anitra! Dream of Peer——.</div>
      <div class="line">Sleep! In sleeping, you the crown have</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_163">163</span>Placed upon your Emperor’s brow!</div>
      <div class="line">Victory on his Person’s basis</div>
      <div class="line">Has Peer Gynt this night achieved.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE EIGHTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>A caravan route. The oasis is seen far off in the
background.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> comes galloping across the desert, on his
white horse, with <span class="sc">Anitra</span> before him on his
saddle-bow.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let be, or I’ll bite you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">You little rogue!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What would you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What would I? Play hawk and dove.</div>
      <div class="line">Run away with you! Frolic and frisk a bit!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">For shame! An old prophet like you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in36">Oh, stuff!</div>
      <div class="line">The prophet’s not old at all, you goose!</div>
      <div class="line">Do you think all this is a sign of age?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let me go! I want to go home!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_164">164</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Coquette!</div>
      <div class="line">What, home!  To papa-in-law! That would be fine!</div>
      <div class="line">We madcap birds that have flown from the cage</div>
      <div class="line">Must never come into his sight again.</div>
      <div class="line">Besides, my child, in the self-same place</div>
      <div class="line">It’s wisest never to stay too long;</div>
      <div class="line">For familiarity lessens respect;—</div>
      <div class="line">Most of all when one comes as a prophet or such.</div>
      <div class="line">One should show oneself glimpse-wise and pass like a dream.</div>
      <div class="line">Faith, ’twas time that the visit should come to an end.</div>
      <div class="line">They’re unstable of soul, are these sons of the desert;—</div>
      <div class="line">Both incense and prayers dwindled off towards the end.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, but are you a prophet?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Your Emperor I <a id="corr164.22"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="am">am!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_164.22"><ins class="correction" title="am">am!</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line">[<i>Tries to kiss her.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Why just see now how coy the wee woodpecker is!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Give me that ring that you have on your finger.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Take, sweet Anitra, the whole of the trash!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thy words are as songs! Oh, how dulcet their sound!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How blessëd to know oneself loved to this <a id="corr164.32"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="pitch">pitch!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_164.32"><ins class="correction" title="pitch">pitch!</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_165">165</span>I’ll dismount! Like your slave, I will lead your palfrey!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hands her his riding-whip, and dismounts.</i></div>
      <div class="line">There now, my rosebud, you exquisite flower!</div>
      <div class="line">Here I’ll go trudging my way through the sand,</div>
      <div class="line">Till a sunstroke o’ertakes me and finishes me.</div>
      <div class="line">I’m young, Anitra; bear that in mind!</div>
      <div class="line">You mustn’t be shocked at my escapades.</div>
      <div class="line">Frolics and high-jinks are youth’s sole criterion!</div>
      <div class="line">And so, if your intellect weren’t so dense,</div>
      <div class="line">You would see at a glance, oh my fair oleander,—</div>
      <div class="line">Your lover is frolicsome—<i>ergo</i>, he’s young!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes, you are young. Have you any more rings?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Am I not? There, grab! I can leap like a buck!</div>
      <div class="line">Were there vine-leaves around, I would garland my brow.</div>
      <div class="line">To be sure I am young! Hei, I’m going to dance!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Dances and sings.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I am a blissful game-cock!</div>
      <div class="line">Peck me, my little pullet!</div>
      <div class="line">Hop-sa-sa! Let me trip it;—</div>
      <div class="line">I am a blissful game-cock!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You are sweating, my prophet; I fear you will melt;—</div>
      <div class="line">Hand me that heavy bag hung at your belt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Tender solicitude! Bear the purse ever;—</div>
      <div class="line">Hearts <a id="corr165.31"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="than">that</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_165.31"><ins class="correction" title="than">that</ins></a></span> can love are content without gold!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Dances and sings again.</i></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_166">166</span>Young Peer Gynt is the maddest wag;—</div>
      <div class="line">He knows not what foot he shall stand upon.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Pooh, says Peer;—pooh, never mind!</div>
      <div class="line">Young Peer Gynt is the maddest wag!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What joy when the Prophet steps forth in the dance!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, bother the Prophet!—Suppose we change clothes!</div>
      <div class="line">Heisa! Strip off!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Your caftan were too long,</div>
      <div class="line">Your girdle too wide, and your stockings too tight——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><i>Eh bien!</i></span><a id="r93"></a><a href="#f93" class="c012"><sup>[93]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Kneels down.</i></div>
      <div class="line in7">But vouchsafe me a vehement sorrow;—</div>
      <div class="line">To a heart full of love, it is sweet to suffer!</div>
      <div class="line">Listen; as soon as we’re home at my castle——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">In your Paradise;—have we far to ride?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, a thousand miles or——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Too far!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in34">Oh, listen;—</div>
      <div class="line">You shall have the soul that I promised you once——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_167">167</span><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, thank you; I’ll get on without the soul.</div>
      <div class="line">But you asked for a sorrow——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Rising.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in31">Ay, curse me, I did!</div>
      <div class="line">A keen one, but short,—to last two or three days!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Anitra.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Anitra obeyeth the Prophet!—Farewell!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Gives him a smart cut across the fingers, and
dashes off, at a tearing gallop, back across
the desert.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stands for a long time thunderstruck.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well now, may I be——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE NINTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>The same place, an hour later.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> is stripping off his Turkish costume,
soberly and thoughtfully, bit by bit. Last of all,
he takes his little travelling-cap out of his coat
pocket, puts it on, and stands once more in European
dress.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Throwing the turban far away from him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There lies the Turk, then, and here stand I!—</div>
      <div class="line">These heathenish doings are no sort of good.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s lucky ’twas only a matter of clothes,</div>
      <div class="line">And not, as the saying goes, bred in the bone.—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_168">168</span>What tempted me into that galley at all?</div>
      <div class="line">It’s best, in the long run, to live as a Christian,</div>
      <div class="line">To put away peacock-like ostentation,</div>
      <div class="line">To base all one’s dealings on law and morality,</div>
      <div class="line">To be ever oneself, and to earn at the last a</div>
      <div class="line">Speech at one’s grave-side, and wreaths on one’s coffin.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Walks a few steps.</i></div>
      <div class="line">The hussy;—she was on the very verge</div>
      <div class="line">Of turning my head clean topsy-turvy.</div>
      <div class="line">May I be a troll if I understand</div>
      <div class="line">What it was that dazed and bemused me so.</div>
      <div class="line">Well; it’s well that’s done: had the joke been carried</div>
      <div class="line">But one step on, I’d have looked absurd.—</div>
      <div class="line">I have erred;——but at least it’s a consolation</div>
      <div class="line">That my error was due to the false situation.</div>
      <div class="line">It wasn’t my personal self that fell.</div>
      <div class="line">’Twas in fact this prophetical way of life,</div>
      <div class="line">So utterly lacking the salt of activity,</div>
      <div class="line">That took its revenge in these qualms of bad taste.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s a sorry business this prophetising!</div>
      <div class="line">One’s office compels one to walk in a mist;</div>
      <div class="line">In playing the prophet, you throw up the game<a id="r94"></a><a href="#f94" class="c012"><sup>[94]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">The moment you act like a rational being.<a id="r95"></a><a href="#f95" class="c012"><sup>[95]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">In so far I’ve done what the occasion demanded,</div>
      <div class="line">In the mere fact of paying my court to that goose.</div>
      <div class="line">But, nevertheless——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Bursts out laughing.</i></div>
      <div class="line in19">H’m, to think of it now!</div>
      <div class="line">To try to make time stop by jigging and dancing,</div>
      <div class="line">And to cope with the current by capering and prancing!</div>
      <div class="line">To thrum on the lute-strings, to fondle and sigh,</div>
      <div class="line">And end, like a rooster,—by getting well plucked!</div>
      <div class="line">Such conduct is truly prophetic frenzy.—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_169">169</span>Yes, plucked!—Phew! I’m plucked clean enough indeed.</div>
      <div class="line">Well, well, I’ve a trifle still left in reserve;</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve a little in America, a little in my pocket;</div>
      <div class="line">So I won’t be quite driven to beg my bread.—</div>
      <div class="line">And at bottom this middle condition is best.</div>
      <div class="line">I’m no longer a slave to my coachman and horses;</div>
      <div class="line">I haven’t to fret about postchaise or baggage;</div>
      <div class="line">I am master, in short, of the situation.—</div>
      <div class="line">What path should I choose? Many paths lie before me;</div>
      <div class="line">And a wise man is known from a fool by his choice.</div>
      <div class="line">My business life is a finished chapter;</div>
      <div class="line">My love-sports, too, are a cast-off garment.</div>
      <div class="line">I feel no desire to live back like a crab.</div>
      <div class="line">“Forward or back, and it’s just as far;</div>
      <div class="line">Out or in, and it’s just as strait,”—</div>
      <div class="line">So I seem to have read in some luminous<a id="r96"></a><a href="#f96" class="c012"><sup>[96]</sup></a> work.—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll try something new, then; ennoble my course;</div>
      <div class="line">Find a goal worth the labour and money it costs.</div>
      <div class="line">Shall I write my life without dissimulation,—</div>
      <div class="line">A book for guidance and imitation?</div>
      <div class="line">Or, stay——! I have plenty of time at command;—</div>
      <div class="line">What if, as a travelling scientist,</div>
      <div class="line">I should study past ages and time’s voracity?</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, sure enough, <em class="gesperrt">that</em> is the thing for me!</div>
      <div class="line">Legends I read e’en in childhood’s days,</div>
      <div class="line">And since then I’ve kept up that branch of learning.—</div>
      <div class="line">I will follow the path of the human race!</div>
      <div class="line">Like a feather I’ll float on the stream of history</div>
      <div class="line">Make it all live again, as in a dream,—</div>
      <div class="line">See the heroes battling for truth and right,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_170">170</span>As an onlooker only, in safety ensconced,—</div>
      <div class="line">See thinkers perish and martyrs bleed,</div>
      <div class="line">See empires founded and vanish away,—</div>
      <div class="line">See world-epochs grow from their trifling seeds;</div>
      <div class="line">In short, I will skim off the cream of history.—</div>
      <div class="line">I must try to get hold of a volume of Becker,</div>
      <div class="line">And travel as far as I can by chronology.—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s true—my grounding’s by no means thorough,</div>
      <div class="line">And history’s wheels within wheels are deceptive;—</div>
      <div class="line">But pooh; the wilder the starting-point,</div>
      <div class="line">The result will oft be the more original.—</div>
      <div class="line">How exalting it is, now, to choose a goal,</div>
      <div class="line">And drive straight for it, like flint and steel!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>With quiet emotion.</i></div>
      <div class="line">To break off all round one, on every side,</div>
      <div class="line">The bonds that bind one to home and friends,—</div>
      <div class="line">To blow into atoms one’s hoarded wealth,—</div>
      <div class="line">To bid one’s love and its joys good night,—</div>
      <div class="line">All simply to find the arcana of truth,—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Wiping a tear from his eye.</i></div>
      <div class="line">That is the test of the true man of science!—</div>
      <div class="line">I feel myself happy beyond all measure.</div>
      <div class="line">Now I have fathomed my destiny’s riddle.</div>
      <div class="line">Now ’tis but persevering through thick and thin!</div>
      <div class="line">It’s excusable, sure, if I hold up my head,</div>
      <div class="line">And feel my worth, as the man, Peer Gynt,</div>
      <div class="line">Also called Human-life’s Emperor.—</div>
      <div class="line">I will own the sum-total of bygone days;</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll nevermore tread in the paths of the living.</div>
      <div class="line">The present is not worth so much as a shoe-sole;</div>
      <div class="line">All faithless and marrowless the doings of men;</div>
      <div class="line">Their soul has no wings and their deeds no</div>
      <div class="line">weight;——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Shrugs his shoulders.</i></div>
      <div class="line">And women,—ah, they are a worthless crew!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes off.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_171">171</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE TENTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c022"><i>A summer day. Far up in the North. A hut in the
forest. The door, with a large wooden bar,
stands open. Reindeer-horns over it. A flock of
goats by the wall of the hut.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">A Middle-aged Woman</span>, fair-haired and comely,
sits spinning outside in the sunshine.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Woman.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Glances down the path and sings.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Maybe both the winter and spring will pass by,</div>
      <div class="line">And the next summer too, and the whole of the year;—</div>
      <div class="line">But thou wilt come one day, that know I full well;</div>
      <div class="line">And I will await thee, as I promised of old.<a id="r97"></a><a href="#f97" class="c012"><sup>[97]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Calls the goats, spins, and sings again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">God strengthen thee, whereso thou goest in the world!</div>
      <div class="line">God gladden thee, if at his footstool thou stand!</div>
      <div class="line">Here will I await thee till thou comest again;</div>
      <div class="line">And if thou wait up yonder, then there we’ll meet, my friend!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE ELEVENTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>In Egypt. Daybreak. <span class="sc">Memnon’s Statue</span> amid the
sands.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> enters on foot, and looks around him for
a while.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Here I might fittingly start on my wanderings.—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_172">172</span>So now, for a change, I’ve become an Egyptian;</div>
      <div class="line">But Egyptian on the basis of the Gyntish I.</div>
      <div class="line">To Assyria next I will bend my steps.</div>
      <div class="line">To begin right back at the world’s creation</div>
      <div class="line">Would lead to nought but bewilderment.</div>
      <div class="line">I will go round about<a id="r98"></a><a href="#f98" class="c012"><sup>[98]</sup></a> all the Bible history;</div>
      <div class="line"><a id="corr172.7"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="It’s">Its</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_172.7"><ins class="correction" title="It’s">Its</ins></a></span> secular traces I’ll always be coming on;</div>
      <div class="line">And to look, as the saying goes, into its seams,</div>
      <div class="line">Lies entirely outside both my plan and my powers.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Sits upon a stone.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Now I will rest me, and patiently wait</div>
      <div class="line">Till the statue has sung its habitual dawn-song.</div>
      <div class="line">When breakfast is over, I’ll climb up the pyramid;</div>
      <div class="line">If I’ve time, I’ll look through its interior afterwards.</div>
      <div class="line">Then I’ll go round the head of the Red Sea by land;</div>
      <div class="line">Perhaps I may hit on King Potiphar’s grave.—</div>
      <div class="line">Next I’ll turn Asiatic. In Babylon I’ll seek for</div>
      <div class="line">The far-renowned harlots and hanging gardens,—</div>
      <div class="line">That’s to say, the chief traces of civilisation.</div>
      <div class="line">Then at one bound to the ramparts of Troy.</div>
      <div class="line">From Troy there’s a fareway by sea direct</div>
      <div class="line">Across to the glorious ancient Athens;—</div>
      <div class="line">There on the spot will I, stone by stone,</div>
      <div class="line">Survey the Pass that Leonidas guarded.</div>
      <div class="line">I will get up the works of the better philosophers,</div>
      <div class="line">Find the prison where Socrates suffered, a martyr——;</div>
      <div class="line">Oh no, by-the-bye—there’s a war there at present——!</div>
      <div class="line">Well, my studies in Hellas must e’en be postponed.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks at his watch.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It’s really too bad, such an age as it takes</div>
      <div class="line">For the sun to rise. I am pressed for time.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_173">173</span>Well then, from Troy—it was there I left off——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Rises and listens.</i></div>
      <div class="line">What is that strange sort of murmur that’s rushing——?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Sunrise.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Memnon’s Statue.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Sings.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-b c014">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">From the demigod’s ashes there soar, youth-renewing,</div>
      <div class="line in10">Birds ever singing.</div>
      <div class="line in10">Zeus the Omniscient</div>
      <div class="line in10">Shaped them contending.</div>
      <div class="line in10">Owls of wisdom,</div>
      <div class="line">My birds, where do they slumber?</div>
      <div class="line">Thou must die if thou rede not</div>
      <div class="line in10">The song’s enigma!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How strange now,—I really fancied there came</div>
      <div class="line">From the statue a sound. Music, this, of the Past.</div>
      <div class="line">I heard the stone-accents now rising, now sinking.—</div>
      <div class="line">I will register it, for the learned to ponder.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Notes in his pocket-book</i></div>
      <div class="line">“The statue did sing. I heard the sound plainly,</div>
      <div class="line">But didn’t quite follow the text of the song.</div>
      <div class="line">The whole thing, of course, was hallucination.—</div>
      <div class="line">Nothing else of importance observed to-day.”</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Proceeds on his way.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_174">174</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE TWELFTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c028"><i>Near the village of Gizeh. The great <span class="sc">Sphinx</span> carved
out of the rock. In the distance the spires and
minarets of Cairo.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> enters; he examines the <span class="sc">Sphinx</span> attentively,
now through his eyeglass, now through his
hollowed hand.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now, where in the world have I met before</div>
      <div class="line">Something half forgotten that’s like this hobgoblin?</div>
      <div class="line">For met it I have, in the north or the south.</div>
      <div class="line">Was it a person? And, if so, who?</div>
      <div class="line">That Memnon, it afterwards crossed my mind,</div>
      <div class="line">Was like the Old Man of the Dovrë, so called,</div>
      <div class="line">Just as he sat there, stiff and stark,</div>
      <div class="line">Planted on end on the stumps of pillars.—</div>
      <div class="line">But this most curious mongrel here,</div>
      <div class="line">This changeling, a lion and woman in one,—</div>
      <div class="line">Does he come to me, too, from a fairy-tale,</div>
      <div class="line">Or from a remembrance of something real?</div>
      <div class="line">From a fairy-tale? Ho, I remember the fellow!</div>
      <div class="line">Why, of course it’s the Boyg, that I smote on the skull,—</div>
      <div class="line">That is, I dreamt it,—I lay in fever.—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Going closer.</i></div>
      <div class="line">The self-same eyes, and the self-same lips;—</div>
      <div class="line">Not quite so lumpish; a little more cunning;</div>
      <div class="line">But the same, for the rest, in all essentials.—</div>
      <div class="line">Ay, so that’s it, Boyg; so you’re like a lion</div>
      <div class="line">When one sees you from behind and meets you in the day-time!</div>
      <div class="line">Are you still good at riddling? Come, let us try.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_175">175</span>Now we shall see if you answer as last time!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Calls out towards the <span class="sc">Sphinx</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Hei, Boyg, who are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Voice.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Behind the <span class="sc">Sphinx</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24"><span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">Ach, Sphinx, wer bist du?</span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What! Echo answers in German! How strange!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Voice.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">Wer bist du?</span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">It speaks it quite fluently too!</div>
      <div class="line">That observation is new, and my own.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Notes in his book.</i></div>
      <div class="line">“Echo in German. Dialect, Berlin.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt</span> comes out from behind
the <span class="sc">Sphinx</span>.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A <a id="corr175.19"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="man">man!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_175.19"><ins class="correction" title="man">man!</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, then it was <em class="gesperrt">he</em> that was chattering.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Notes again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">“Arrived in the sequel at other results.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With all sorts of restless antics.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Excuse me, <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">mein Herr</span><a id="r99"></a><a href="#f99" class="c012"><sup>[99]</sup></a>——!  <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">Eine Lebensfrage——!</span><a href="#f99" class="c012"><sup>[99]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">What brings you to this place precisely to-day?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A visit. I’m greeting a friend of my youth.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_176">176</span><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What? The Sphinx——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Nods.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Yes, I knew him in days gone by.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Famos!<a id="r100"></a><a href="#f100" class="c012"><sup>[100]</sup></a>—And that after such a night!</div>
      <div class="line">My temples are hammering as though they would burst!</div>
      <div class="line">You know him, man! Answer! Say on! Can you tell</div>
      <div class="line">What he is?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">What he is? Yes, that’s easy enough.</div>
      <div class="line">He’s <em class="gesperrt">himself</em>.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a bound.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Ha, the riddle of life lightened forth</div>
      <div class="line">In a flash to my vision!—It’s certain he is</div>
      <div class="line">Himself?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">Yes, he says so, at any rate.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Himself! Revolution! thine hour is at hand!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Takes off his hat.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Your name, pray, <span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">mein Herr</span>?<a href="#f100" class="c012"><sup>[100]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">I was christened Peer Gynt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_177">177</span><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In rapt admiration.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt! Allegoric! I might have foreseen it.—</div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt? That must clearly imply: The Unknown,—</div>
      <div class="line">The Comer whose coming was augured to me——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What, really? And now you are here to meet——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt! Profound! Enigmatic! Incisive!</div>
      <div class="line">Each word, as it were, an abysmal lesson!</div>
      <div class="line">What are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Modestly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">I’ve always endeavoured to be</div>
      <div class="line">Myself. For the rest, here’s my passport, you see.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Again that mysterious word at the bottom.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Seizes him by the wrist.</i></div>
      <div class="line">To Cairo! The Interpreters’ Kaiser is found!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Kaiser?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">Come on!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Am I really known——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Dragging him away.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Interpreters’ Kaiser—on the basis of Self!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_178">178</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE THIRTEENTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c028"><i>In Cairo. A large courtyard, surrounded by high
walls and buildings. Barred windows; iron
cages.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Three Keepers</span> in the courtyard. <span class="sc">A Fourth</span>
comes in.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Newcomer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Schafmann, say, where’s the director gone?</div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
      <div class="c010"><span class="sc">A Keeper.</span></div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He drove out this morning some time before dawn.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The First.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I think something must have occurred to annoy him;</div>
      <div class="line">For last night——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Hush, be quiet; he’s there at the door!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt</span> leads <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> in,
locks the gate, and puts the key in his
pocket.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To himself.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Indeed an exceedingly gifted man;</div>
      <div class="line">Almost all that he says is beyond comprehension.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks around.</i></div>
      <div class="line">So this is the Club of the Savants, eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Here you will find them, every man jack of them;—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_179">179</span>The group of Interpreters threescore and ten;<a id="r101"></a><a href="#f101" class="c012"><sup>[101]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Of late it has grown by a hundred and sixty——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Shouts to the <span class="sc">Keepers</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Mikkel, Schlingelberg, Schafmann, Fuchs,—</div>
      <div class="line">Into the cages with you at once!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Keepers.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in4">Who else, pray? Get in, get in!</div>
      <div class="line">When the world twirls around, we must twirl with it too.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Forces them into a cage.</i></div>
      <div class="line">He’s arrived this morning, the mighty Peer;—</div>
      <div class="line">The rest you can guess,—I need say no more.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Locks the cage door, and throws the key
into a well.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But, my dear Herr Doctor and Director, pray——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Neither one nor the other! I was before——</div>
      <div class="line">Herr Peer, are you secret? I must ease my heart——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With increasing uneasiness.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What is it?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">Promise you will not tremble.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I will do my best, but——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_180">180</span><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Draws him into a corner, and whispers.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">The Absolute Reason</div>
      <div class="line">Departed this life at eleven last night.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">God help me——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Why, yes, it’s extremely deplorable.</div>
      <div class="line">And as I’m placed, you see, it is doubly unpleasant;</div>
      <div class="line">For this institution has passed up to now</div>
      <div class="line">For what’s called a madhouse.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">A madhouse, ha!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Not <em class="gesperrt">now</em>, understand!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Softly, pale with fear.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Now I see what the place is!</div>
      <div class="line">And the man is mad;—and there’s none that knows it!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Tries to steal away.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Following him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">However, I hope you don’t misunderstand me?</div>
      <div class="line">When I said he was dead, I was talking stuff.</div>
      <div class="line">He’s beside himself. Started clean out of his skin,—</div>
      <div class="line">Just like my compatriot Münchausen’s fox.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Excuse me a moment——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_181">181</span><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Holding him back.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">I meant like an eel;—</div>
      <div class="line">It was not like a fox. A needle through his eye;—</div>
      <div class="line">And he writhed on the wall——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in31">Where can rescue be found?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A snick round his neck, and whip! out of his <a id="corr181.9"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="skin">skin!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_181.9"><ins class="correction" title="skin">skin!</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He’s raving! He’s utterly out of his wits!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now it’s patent, and can’t be dissimulated,</div>
      <div class="line">That this from-himself-going must have for result</div>
      <div class="line">A complete revolution by sea and land.</div>
      <div class="line">The persons one hitherto reckoned as mad,</div>
      <div class="line">You see, became normal last night at eleven,</div>
      <div class="line">Accordant with Reason in its newest phase.</div>
      <div class="line">And more, if the matter be rightly regarded,</div>
      <div class="line">It’s patent that, at the aforementioned hour,</div>
      <div class="line">The sane folks, so called, began forthwith to rave.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You mentioned the hour, sir; my time is but scant——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Your time, did you say?  There you jog my remembrance!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Opens a door and calls out.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Come forth all! The time that shall be is proclaimed!</div>
      <div class="line">Reason is dead and gone; long live Peer Gynt!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_182">182</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now, my dear good fellow——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>The <span class="sc">Lunatics</span> come one by one, and at
intervals, into the courtyard.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Good morning! Come forth,</div>
      <div class="line">And hail the dawn of emancipation!</div>
      <div class="line">Your Kaiser has come to you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Kaiser?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in37">Of course!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But the honour’s so great, so entirely excessive——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, do not let any false modesty sway you</div>
      <div class="line">At an hour such as this.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">But at least give me time——</div>
      <div class="line">No, indeed, I’m not fit; I’m completely dumbfounded!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A man who has fathomed the Sphinx’s <a id="corr182.23"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="meaning">meaning!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_182.23"><ins class="correction" title="meaning">meaning!</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line">A man who’s himself!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Ay, but that’s just the rub.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s true that in everything I am myself;</div>
      <div class="line">But here the point is, if I follow your meaning,</div>
      <div class="line">To be, so to phrase it, outside oneself.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_183">183</span><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Outside? No, there you are strangely mistaken!</div>
      <div class="line">It’s here, sir, that one is oneself with a vengeance;</div>
      <div class="line">Oneself, and nothing whatever besides.</div>
      <div class="line">We go, full sail, as our very selves.</div>
      <div class="line">Each one shuts himself up in the barrel of self,</div>
      <div class="line">In the self-fermentation he dives to the bottom,—</div>
      <div class="line">With the self-bung he seals it hermetically,</div>
      <div class="line">And seasons the staves in the well of self.</div>
      <div class="line">No one has tears for the other’s woes;</div>
      <div class="line">No one has mind for the other’s ideas.</div>
      <div class="line">We’re our very selves, both in thought and tone,</div>
      <div class="line">Ourselves to the spring-board’s uttermost verge,—</div>
      <div class="line">And so, if a Kaiser’s to fill the Throne,</div>
      <div class="line">It is clear that you are the very man.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">O would that the devil——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Come, don’t be cast down;</div>
      <div class="line">Almost all things in nature are new at the first.</div>
      <div class="line">“Oneself”;—come, here you shall see an example;</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll choose you at random the first man that comes——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>To a gloomy figure.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Good-day, Huhu?  Well, my boy, wandering round</div>
      <div class="line">For ever with misery’s impress upon you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Huhu.</span><a id="r102"></a><a href="#f102" class="c012"><sup>[102]</sup></a></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Can I help it, when the people,</div>
      <div class="line">Race<a id="r103"></a><a href="#f103" class="c012"><sup>[103]</sup></a> by race, dies untranslated.<a id="r104"></a><a href="#f104" class="c012"><sup>[104]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>To <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line">You’re a stranger; will you listen?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_184">184</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Bowing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, by all means!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Huhu.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Lend your ear then.—</div>
      <div class="line">Eastward far, like brow-borne garlands,</div>
      <div class="line">Lie the Malabarish seaboards.</div>
      <div class="line">Hollanders and Portugueses</div>
      <div class="line">Compass all the land with culture.</div>
      <div class="line">There, moreover, swarms are dwelling</div>
      <div class="line">Of the pure-bred Malabaris.</div>
      <div class="line">These have muddled up the language,</div>
      <div class="line">They now lord it in the country.—</div>
      <div class="line">But in long-departed ages</div>
      <div class="line">There the orang-outang was the ruler.</div>
      <div class="line">He, the forest’s lord and master,</div>
      <div class="line">Freely fought and snarled in freedom.</div>
      <div class="line">As the hand of nature shaped him,</div>
      <div class="line">Just so grinned he, just so gaped he.</div>
      <div class="line">He could shriek unreprehended;</div>
      <div class="line">He was ruler in his kingdom.—</div>
      <div class="line">Ah, but then the foreign yoke came,</div>
      <div class="line">Marred the forest-tongue primeval.</div>
      <div class="line">Twice two hundred years of darkness<a id="r105"></a><a href="#f105" class="c012"><sup>[105]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Brooded o’er the race of monkeys;</div>
      <div class="line">And, you know, nights so protracted</div>
      <div class="line">Bring a people to a standstill.—</div>
      <div class="line">Mute are now the wood-notes primal;</div>
      <div class="line">Grunts and growls are heard no longer;—</div>
      <div class="line">If we’d utter our ideas,</div>
      <div class="line">It must be by means of language.</div>
      <div class="line">What constraint on all and sundry!</div>
      <div class="line">Hollanders and Portugueses,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_185">185</span>Half-caste race and Malabaris,</div>
      <div class="line">All alike must suffer by it.—</div>
      <div class="line">I have tried to fight the battle</div>
      <div class="line">Of our real, primal wood-speech,—</div>
      <div class="line">Tried to bring to life its carcass,—</div>
      <div class="line">Proved the people’s right of shrieking,—</div>
      <div class="line">Shrieked myself, and shown the need of</div>
      <div class="line">Shrieks in poems for the people.—</div>
      <div class="line">Scantly, though, my work is valued.—</div>
      <div class="line">Now I think you grasp my sorrow.</div>
      <div class="line">Thanks for lending me a hearing;—</div>
      <div class="line">Have you counsel, let me hear it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Softly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It is written: Best be howling</div>
      <div class="line">With the wolves that are about you.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Aloud.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Friend, if I remember rightly,</div>
      <div class="line">There are bushes in Morocco,</div>
      <div class="line">Where orang-outangs in plenty</div>
      <div class="line">Live with neither bard nor spokesman;—</div>
      <div class="line">Their speech sounded Malabarish;—</div>
      <div class="line">It was classical and pleasing.</div>
      <div class="line">Why don’t you, like other worthies,</div>
      <div class="line">Emigrate to serve your country?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Huhu.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thanks for lending me a hearing;—</div>
      <div class="line">I will do as you advise me.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>With a large gesture.</i></div>
      <div class="line">East! thou hast disowned thy singer!</div>
      <div class="line">West! thou hast orang-outangs still!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, was he himself? I should rather think so.</div>
      <div class="line">He’s filled with his own affairs, simply and solely.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_186">186</span>He’s himself in all that comes out of him,—</div>
      <div class="line">Himself, just because he’s beside himself.</div>
      <div class="line">Come here! Now I’ll show you another one</div>
      <div class="line">Who’s no less, since last evening, accordant with Reason.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>To a <span class="sc">Fellah</span>, with a mummy on his back.</i></div>
      <div class="line">King Apis, how goes it, my mighty lord?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Fellah.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Wildly, to <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Am I King Apis?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Getting behind the Doctor.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">I’m sorry to say</div>
      <div class="line">I’m not quite at home in the situation;</div>
      <div class="line">But I certainly gather, to judge by your tone——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Fellah.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now you too are lying.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Your Highness should state</div>
      <div class="line">How the whole matter stands.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Fellah.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Yes, I’ll tell him my tale.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Turns to <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Do you see whom I bear on my shoulders?</div>
      <div class="line">His name was King Apis of old.</div>
      <div class="line">Now he goes by the title of mummy,</div>
      <div class="line">And withal he’s completely dead.</div>
      <div class="line in2">All the pyramids yonder he builded,</div>
      <div class="line">And hewed out the mighty Sphinx,</div>
      <div class="line">And fought, as the Doctor puts it,</div>
      <div class="line">With the Turks, both to rechts and links.</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_187">187</span>And therefore the whole of Egypt</div>
      <div class="line">Exalted him as a god,</div>
      <div class="line">And set up his image in temples,</div>
      <div class="line">In the outward shape of a bull.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">But <i>I</i> am this very King Apis,</div>
      <div class="line">I see that as clear as day;</div>
      <div class="line">And if you don’t understand it,</div>
      <div class="line">You shall understand it soon.</div>
      <div class="line in2">King Apis, you see, was out hunting,</div>
      <div class="line">And got off his horse awhile,</div>
      <div class="line">And withdrew himself unattended</div>
      <div class="line">To a part of my ancestor’s land.</div>
      <div class="line in2">But the field that King Apis manured</div>
      <div class="line">Has nourished <em class="gesperrt">me</em> with its corn;</div>
      <div class="line">And if further proofs are demanded,</div>
      <div class="line">Know, I have invisible horns.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Now, isn’t it most accursëd</div>
      <div class="line">That no one will own my might!</div>
      <div class="line">By birth I am Apis of Egypt,</div>
      <div class="line">But a fellah in other men’s sight.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Can you tell me what course to follow?—</div>
      <div class="line">Then counsel me honestly.—</div>
      <div class="line">The problem is how to make me</div>
      <div class="line">Resemble King Apis the Great.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Build pyramids then, your highness,</div>
      <div class="line">And carve out a greater Sphinx,</div>
      <div class="line">And fight, as the Doctor puts it,</div>
      <div class="line">With the Turks, both to rechts and links.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Fellah.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Ay, that is all mighty fine talking!</div>
      <div class="line">A fellah! A hungry louse!</div>
      <div class="line">I, who scarcely can keep my hovel</div>
      <div class="line">Clear even of rats and mice.</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_188">188</span>Quick, man,—think of something better,</div>
      <div class="line">That’ll make me both great and safe,</div>
      <div class="line">And further, exactly like to</div>
      <div class="line">King Apis that’s on my back!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">What if your highness hanged you,</div>
      <div class="line">And then, in the lap of earth,</div>
      <div class="line">’Twixt the coffin’s natural frontiers,</div>
      <div class="line">Kept still and completely dead.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Fellah.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">I’ll do it! My life for a halter!</div>
      <div class="line">To the gallows with hide and hair!—</div>
      <div class="line">At first there will be some difference,</div>
      <div class="line">But that time will smooth away.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes off and prepares to hang himself.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There’s a personality for you, Herr Peer,—</div>
      <div class="line">A man of method——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">Yes, yes; I see——;</div>
      <div class="line">But he’ll really hang himself!  God grant us grace!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll be ill;—I can scarcely command my thoughts!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A state of transition; it won’t last long.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Transition? To what? With your leave—I must go——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Holding him</i>.]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are you crazy?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_189">189</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">Not yet——. Crazy? Heaven forbid!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>A commotion. The Minister <span class="sc">Hussein</span><a id="r106"></a><a href="#f106" class="c012"><sup>[106]</sup></a>
forces his way through the crowd.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">They tell me a Kaiser has come to-day.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>To <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line">It is you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In desperation.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Yes, that is a settled thing!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good.—Then no doubt there are notes to be answered?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Tearing his hair.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come on! Right you are, sir;—the madder the better!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Will you do me the honour of taking a dip?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Bowing deeply.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I am a pen.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Bowing still deeper.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">Why then I am quite clearly</div>
      <div class="line">A rubbishy piece of imperial parchment.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My story, my lord, is concisely this:</div>
      <div class="line">They take me for a pounce-box,<a id="r107"></a><a href="#f107" class="c012"><sup>[107]</sup></a> and I am a pen.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_190">190</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My story, Sir Pen, is, to put it briefly:</div>
      <div class="line">I’m a blank sheet of paper that no one will write on.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No man understands in the least what I’m good for;</div>
      <div class="line">They all want to use me for scattering sand with!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I was in a woman’s keeping a silver-clasped book;—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s one and the same misprint to be either mad or sane!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Just fancy, what an exhausting life.</div>
      <div class="line">To be a pen and never taste the edge of a knife!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a high leap.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Just fancy, for a reindeer to leap from on high—</div>
      <div class="line">To fall and fall—and never feel the ground beneath your hoofs!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A knife! I am blunt;—quick, mend me and slit me!</div>
      <div class="line">The world will go to ruin if they don’t mend my point for me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A pity for the world which, like other self-made things,</div>
      <div class="line">Was reckoned by the Lord to be so excellently good.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_191">191</span><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Here’s a knife!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Seizing it.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Ah, how I shall lick up the ink now!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, what rapture to cut oneself!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Cuts his throat.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stepping aside.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in33">Pray do not <a id="corr191.9"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="sputter">sputter.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_191.9"><ins class="correction" title="sputter">sputter.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In increasing terror.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hold him!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Hussein.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">Ay, hold me! That is the word!</div>
      <div class="line">Hold! Hold the pen! On the desk with the paper——!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Falls.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I’m outworn. The postscript—remember it, pray:</div>
      <div class="line">He lived and he died as a fate-guided <a id="corr191.18"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="pen">pen.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_191.18"><ins class="correction" title="pen">pen.</ins></a></span><a id="r108"></a><a href="#f108" class="c012"><sup>[108]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Dizzily.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What shall I——! What am I? Thou mighty——hold fast!</div>
      <div class="line">I am all that thou wilt,—I’m a Turk, I’m a sinner——</div>
      <div class="line">A hill-troll——; but help;—there was something that burst——!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Shrieks.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I cannot just hit on thy name at the moment;—</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, come to my aid, thou—all madmen’s protector!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Sinks down insensible.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_192">192</span><span class="sc">Begriffenfeldt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a wreath of straw in his hand, gives a bound</i></div>
    <div><i>and sits astride of him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ha! See him in the mire enthronëd;—</div>
      <div class="line">Beside himself——To crown him now!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Presses the wreath on <span class="sc">Peer Gynt’s</span> head,
and shouts</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Long life, long life to Self-hood’s Kaiser!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Schafmann.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In the cage.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de">Es lebe hoch der grosse Peer!</span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f65">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r65">65</a>. In the original, “Master Cotton.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f66">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r66">66</a>. A Swede. The name means “trumpet-blast.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f67">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r67">67</a>. In the original (early editions), “Werry well.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f68">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r68">68</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f69">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r69">69</a>. This may not be a very lucid or even very precise rendering
of <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">Verdensborgerdomsforpagtning</span>; but this line, and indeed the
whole speech, is pure burlesque; and the exact sense of nonsense
is naturally elusive.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f70">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r70">70</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f71">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r71">71</a>. Literally, “pack-camel.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f72">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r72">72</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f73">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r73">73</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f74">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r74">74</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f75">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r75">75</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f76">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r76">76</a>. In the original “kejser.” We have elsewhere used the
word “Kaiser,” but in this scene, and in Scenes 7 and 8 of this
act, the ordinary English form seemed preferable.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f77">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r77">77</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f78">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r78">78</a>. An allusion to the spurs with which Charles XII. is said to
have torn the caftan of the Turkish Vizier who announced to
him that the Sultan had concluded a truce with Russia. The
boots and spurs, it would appear, have been preserved, but with
the buckles missing.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f79">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r79">79</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f80">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r80">80</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f81">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r81">81</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f82">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r82">82</a>. Mr. Cotton seems to have confounded Olympus with
Parnassus.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f83">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r83">83</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f84">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r84">84</a>. An allusion to the attitude of Sweden during the Danish
War of 1863-64, with special reference to the diplomatic notes
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Grev Manderström. He is
also aimed at in the character of Hussein in the last scene of
this act. See Introduction.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f85">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r85">85</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f86">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r86">86</a>. This is not to be taken as a burlesque instance of the poet’s
supposed preoccupation with questions of heredity, but simply
as an allusion to the fact that, in the East, thieving and
receiving are regular and hereditary professions.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f87">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r87">87</a>. This proposal was seriously mooted about ten years after
the appearance of <i>Peer Gynt</i>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f88">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r88">88</a>. Or “ego.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f89">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r89">89</a>. In original, <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Pundsterling og shilling.”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f90">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r90">90</a>. In the original, <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“De har snydt——hm; jeg mener syndet,
mit barn!”</span></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f91">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r91">91</a>. In the previous edition we restored the exact wording of
Goethe’s line, “zieht uns hinan.” We ought to have understood
that the point of the speech lay in the misquotation.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f92">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r92">92</a>. Literally, “on the basis of.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f93">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r93">93</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f94">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r94">94</a>. Literally, “you’re looed” or “euchred.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f95">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r95">95</a>. Literally, “behave as though sober and <a id="corr168.36"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="wakeful">wakeful.”</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_168.36"><ins class="correction" title="wakeful">wakeful.”</ins></a></span></p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f96">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r96">96</a>. Literally, “<span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><i>spirituel</i></span>.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f97">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r97">97</a>. <i>Sidst</i>—literally, “when last we met.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f98">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r98">98</a>. “Gå udenom,” the phrase used by the Boyg, Act ii. sc. 7.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f99">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r99">99</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f100">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r100">100</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f101">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r101">101</a>. This is understood to refer to the authors of the Greek
version of the Old Testament, known as the Septuagint. We
are unable to account for the hundred and sixty recruits to their
company.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f102">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r102">102</a>. See Introduction.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f103">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r103">103</a>. Literally, “generation.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f104">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r104">104</a>. Literally, “uninterpreted.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f105">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r105">105</a>. An allusion to the long period of stagnation in the history of
Norway under the Danish rule—say, from 1400 to 1800.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f106">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r106">106</a>. See note, p. <a href="#f84">140</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f107">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r107">107</a>. The pounce-box (for strewing “pounce” or sand on undried
ink) had not yet been quite superseded by blotting-paper.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f108">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r108">108</a>. “En påholden pen.” <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Underskrive med påholden pen”</span>—to
sign by touching a pen which is guided by another.</p>
</div>
<hr class="c018" />

<div class="chapter">
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_193">193</span>
  <h2 class="c008">ACT FIFTH.</h2>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FIRST.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>On board a ship on the North Sea, off the Norwegian
coast. Sunset. Stormy weather.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>, a vigorous old man, with grizzled hair
and beard, is standing aft on the poop. He is
dressed half sailor-fashion, with a pea-jacket and
long boots. His clothing is rather the worse for
wear; he himself is weather-beaten, and has a
somewhat harder expression. The <span class="sc">Captain</span> is
standing beside the steersman at the wheel. The
crew are forward.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Leans with his arms on the bulwark, and gazes</i></div>
    <div><i>towards the land.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Look at Hallingskarv<a id="r109"></a><a href="#f109" class="c012"><sup>[109]</sup></a> in his winter furs;—</div>
      <div class="line">He’s ruffling it, old one, in the evening glow.</div>
      <div class="line">The Jokel,<a href="#f109" class="c012"><sup>[109]</sup></a> his brother, stands behind him askew;</div>
      <div class="line">He’s got his green ice-mantle still on his back.</div>
      <div class="line">The Folgefånn,<a href="#f109" class="c012"><sup>[109]</sup></a> now, she is mighty fine,—</div>
      <div class="line">Lying there like a maiden in spotless white.</div>
      <div class="line">Don’t you be madcaps, old boys that you are!</div>
      <div class="line">Stand where you stand; you’re but granite knobs.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shouts forward.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Two hands to the wheel, and the lantern aloft!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_194">194</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s blowing up stiff——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">——for a gale to-night.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Can one see the Rondë Hills from the sea?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, how should you? They lie at the back of the snowfields.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Or Blåhö?<a id="r110"></a><a href="#f110" class="c012"><sup>[110]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">No; but from up in the rigging,</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve a glimpse, in clear weather, of Galdhöpiggen.<a href="#f110" class="c012"><sup>[110]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Where does HÃ¥rteig<a href="#f110" class="c012"><sup>[110]</sup></a> lie?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pointing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">About over there.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I thought so.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">You know where you are, it appears.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">When I left the country, I sailed by here;</div>
      <div class="line">And the dregs, says the proverb, hang in to the last.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Spits, and gazes at the coast.</i></div>
      <div class="line">In there, where the screes and the clefts lie blue,—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_195">195</span>Where the valleys, like trenches, gloom narrow and black,—</div>
      <div class="line">And underneath, skirting the open fiords,—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s in places like these human beings abide.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks at the Captain.</i></div>
      <div class="line">They build far apart in this country.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in38">Ay;</div>
      <div class="line">Few are the dwellings and far between.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Shall we get in by day-break?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Thereabouts;</div>
      <div class="line">If we don’t have too dirty a night altogether.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It grows thick in the west.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">It does so.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in40">Stop a bit!</div>
      <div class="line">You might put me in mind when we make up accounts—</div>
      <div class="line">I’m inclined, as the phrase goes, to do a good turn</div>
      <div class="line">To the crew——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">I thank you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">It won’t be much</div>
      <div class="line">I have dug for gold, and lost what I found;—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_196">196</span>We are quite at loggerheads, Fate and I.</div>
      <div class="line">You know what I’ve got in safe keeping on board—</div>
      <div class="line">That’s all I have left;—the rest’s gone to the devil.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s more than enough, though, to make you of weight</div>
      <div class="line">Among people at home here.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">I’ve no relations.</div>
      <div class="line">There’s no one awaiting the rich old curmudgeon.—</div>
      <div class="line">Well; that saves you, at least, any scenes on the pier!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Here comes the storm.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Well, remember then—</div>
      <div class="line">If any of your crew are in real need,</div>
      <div class="line">I won’t look too closely after the money——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That’s kind. They are most of them ill enough off;</div>
      <div class="line">They have all got their wives and their children at home.</div>
      <div class="line">With their wages alone they can scarce make ends meet;</div>
      <div class="line">But if they come home with some cash to the good,</div>
      <div class="line">It will be a return not forgot in a hurry.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What do you say? Have they wives and children?</div>
      <div class="line">Are they married?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_197">197</span><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Married? Ay, every man of them.</div>
      <div class="line">But the one that is worst off of all is the cook;</div>
      <div class="line">Black famine is ever at home in his house.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Married?  They’ve folks that await them at home?</div>
      <div class="line">Folks to be glad when they come? Eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in37">Of course,</div>
      <div class="line">In poor people’s fashion.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">And come they one evening,</div>
      <div class="line">What then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">Why, I daresay the goodwife will fetch</div>
      <div class="line">Something good for a treat——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in31">And a light in the sconce?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, ay, may be two; and a dram to their <a id="corr197.21"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="supper">supper.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_197.21"><ins class="correction" title="supper">supper.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And there they sit snug! There’s a fire on the hearth!</div>
      <div class="line">They’ve their children about them! The room’s full of chatter;</div>
      <div class="line">Not one hears another right out to an end,</div>
      <div class="line">For the joy that is on them——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_198">198</span><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in33">It’s likely enough.</div>
      <div class="line">So it’s really kind, as you promised just now,</div>
      <div class="line">To help eke things out.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Thumping the bulwark.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">I’ll be damned if I do.</div>
      <div class="line">Do you think I am mad? Would you have me fork out</div>
      <div class="line">For the sake of a parcel of other folks’ brats?</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve slaved much too sorely in earning my cash</div>
      <div class="line">There’s nobody waiting for old Peer Gynt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well well; as you please then; your money’s your own.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Right! Mine it is, and no one else’s.</div>
      <div class="line">We’ll reckon as soon as your anchor is down!</div>
      <div class="line">Take my fare, in the cabin, from Panama here.</div>
      <div class="line">Then brandy all round to the crew. Nothing more.</div>
      <div class="line">If I give a doit more, slap my jaw for me, Captain.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I owe you a quittance, and not a thrashing;—</div>
      <div class="line">But excuse me, the wind’s blowing up to a gale.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He goes forward.  It has fallen dark;
lights are lit in the cabin.  The sea
increases. Fog and thick clouds.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To have a whole bevy of youngsters at home;—</div>
      <div class="line">Still to dwell in their minds as a coming delight;—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_199">199</span>To have others’ thoughts follow you still on your path!—</div>
      <div class="line">There’s never a soul gives a thought to me.—</div>
      <div class="line">Lights in the sconces! I’ll put out those lights.</div>
      <div class="line">I will hit upon something!—I’ll make them all drunk;—</div>
      <div class="line">Not one of the devils shall go sober ashore.</div>
      <div class="line">They shall all come home drunk to their children and wives!</div>
      <div class="line">They shall curse; bang the table till it rings again,—</div>
      <div class="line">They shall scare those that wait for them out of their wits!</div>
      <div class="line">The goodwife shall scream and rush forth from the house,—</div>
      <div class="line">Clutch her children along! All their joy gone to ruin!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>The ship gives a heavy lurch; he staggers
and keeps his balance with difficulty.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, that was a buffet and no mistake.</div>
      <div class="line">The sea’s hard at labour, as though it were paid for it;—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s still itself here on the coasts of the north;—</div>
      <div class="line">A cross-sea, as wry and wrong-headed as ever——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Listens.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Why, what can those screams be?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Look-out.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Forward.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">A wreck <a id="corr199.29"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="a-lee">a-lee!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_199.29"><ins class="correction" title="a-lee">a-lee!</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>On the main deck, shouts.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Starboard your helm!  Bring her up to the wind!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_200">200</span><span class="sc">The Mate.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Are there men on the wreck?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Look-out.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">I can just see three!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Quick: lower the stern boat——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">She’d fill ere she floated.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes forward.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who can think of that now?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>To some of the crew.</i></div>
      <div class="line in27">If you’re men, to the rescue!</div>
      <div class="line">What the devil, if you should get a bit of a ducking.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Boatswain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s out of the question in such a sea.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">They are screaming again! There’s a lull in the wind.—</div>
      <div class="line">Cook, will you risk it? Quick! I will pay——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, not if you offered me twenty pounds-sterling<a id="r111"></a><a href="#f111" class="c012"><sup>[111]</sup></a>——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You hounds! You chicken-hearts! Can you forget</div>
      <div class="line">These are men that have goodwives and children at home?</div>
      <div class="line">There they’re sitting and waiting——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_201">201</span><span class="sc">The Boatswain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in35">Well, patience is wholesome.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Bear away from that sea!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Mate.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">There the wreck capsized!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All is silent of a sudden——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Boatswain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in31">Were they married, as you think,</div>
      <div class="line">There are three new-baked widows even now in the world.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>The storm increases. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> moves
away aft.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There is no faith left among men any more,—</div>
      <div class="line">No Christianity,—well may they say it and write it;—</div>
      <div class="line">Their good deeds are few and their prayers are still fewer,</div>
      <div class="line">And they pay no respect to the Powers above them.—</div>
      <div class="line">In a storm like to-night’s, he’s a terror, the Lord is.</div>
      <div class="line">These beasts should be careful, and think, what’s the truth,</div>
      <div class="line">That it’s dangerous playing with elephants;—</div>
      <div class="line">And yet they must openly brave his displeasure!</div>
      <div class="line"><i>I</i> am no whit to blame; for the sacrifice</div>
      <div class="line">I can prove I stood ready, my money in hand.</div>
      <div class="line">But how does it profit me?—What says the proverb?</div>
      <div class="line">A conscience at ease is a pillow of down.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_202">202</span>Oh ay, that is all very well on dry land,</div>
      <div class="line">But I’m blest if it matters a snuff on board ship,</div>
      <div class="line">When a decent man’s out on the seas with such riff-raff.</div>
      <div class="line">At sea one can never be one’s self;</div>
      <div class="line">One must go with the others from deck to keel;</div>
      <div class="line">If for boatswain and cook the hour of vengeance should strike,</div>
      <div class="line">I shall no doubt be swept to the deuce with the rest;—</div>
      <div class="line">One’s personal welfare is clean set aside;—</div>
      <div class="line">One counts but as a sausage in slaughtering-time.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">My mistake is this: I have been too meek;</div>
      <div class="line">And I’ve had no thanks for it after all.</div>
      <div class="line">Were I younger, I think I would shift the saddle,</div>
      <div class="line">And try how it answered to lord it awhile.</div>
      <div class="line">There is time enough yet! They shall know in the parish</div>
      <div class="line">That Peer has come sailing aloft o’er the seas!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll get back the farmstead by fair means or foul;—</div>
      <div class="line">I will build it anew; it shall shine like a palace.</div>
      <div class="line">But none shall be suffered to enter the hall!</div>
      <div class="line">They shall stand at the gateway, all twirling their caps;—</div>
      <div class="line">They shall beg and beseech—<em class="gesperrt">that</em> they freely may do;</div>
      <div class="line">But none gets so much as a farthing of mine.</div>
      <div class="line">If <em class="gesperrt">I’ve</em> had to howl ’neath the lashes of fate,</div>
      <div class="line">Trust me to find folks I can lash in my turn——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Strange Passenger.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stands in the darkness at <span class="sc">Peer Gynt’s</span> side, and</i></div>
    <div><i>salutes him in friendly fashion.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good evening!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_203">203</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Good evening! What——? Who are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Your fellow-passenger, at your service.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Indeed? I thought I was the only one.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A mistaken impression, which now is set right.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But it’s singular that, for the first time to-night,</div>
      <div class="line">I should see you——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">I never come out in the day-time.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Perhaps you are ill? You’re as white as a sheet——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, thank you—my health is uncommonly good.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What a raging storm!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Ay, a blessëd one, man!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A blessëd one?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">Sea’s running high as houses</div>
      <div class="line">Ah, one can feel one’s mouth watering!</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_204">204</span>Just think of the wrecks that to-night will be shattered;—</div>
      <div class="line">And think, too, what corpses will drive ashore!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Lord save us!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Have ever you seen a man strangled,</div>
      <div class="line">Or hanged,—or drowned?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">This is going too far——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The corpses all laugh. But their laughter is forced;</div>
      <div class="line">And the most part are found to have bitten their tongues.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hold off from me——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Only one question, pray!</div>
      <div class="line">If we, for example, should strike on a rock,</div>
      <div class="line">And sink in the darkness——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">You think there is danger?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I really don’t know what I ought to say.</div>
      <div class="line">But suppose, now, I float and you go to the bottom——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, rubbish——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_205">205</span><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">It’s just a hypothesis.</div>
      <div class="line">But when one is placed with one foot in the grave,</div>
      <div class="line">One grows softhearted and open-handed——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Puts his hand in his pocket.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ho, money?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">No, no; but perhaps you would kindly</div>
      <div class="line">Make me a gift of your much-esteemed carcass——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This is <em class="gesperrt">too</em> much!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">No more than your body, you know!</div>
      <div class="line">To help my researches in science——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in37">Begone!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But think, my dear sir—the advantage is yours!</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll have you laid open and brought to the light.</div>
      <div class="line">What I specially seek is the centre of dreams,—</div>
      <div class="line">And with critical care I’ll look into your seams——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Away with you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in15">Why, my dear sir—a drowned corpse——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Blasphemer! You’re goading the rage of the storm!</div>
      <div class="line">I call it too bad! Here it’s raining and blowing,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_206">206</span>A terrible sea on, and all sorts of signs</div>
      <div class="line">Of something that’s likely to shorten our days;—</div>
      <div class="line">And you carry on so as to make it come <a id="corr206.3"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="quicker">quicker.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_206.3"><ins class="correction" title="quicker">quicker.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re in no mood, I see, to negotiate further;</div>
      <div class="line">But time, you know, brings with it many a change——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Nods in a friendly fashion.</i></div>
      <div class="line">We’ll meet when you’re sinking, if not before;</div>
      <div class="line">Perhaps I may then find you more in the humour.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes into the cabin.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Unpleasant companions these scientists are!</div>
      <div class="line">With their freethinking ways——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>To the <span class="sc">Boatswain</span>, who is passing.</i></div>
      <div class="line in33">Hark, a word with you, friend!</div>
      <div class="line">That passenger? What crazy creature is he?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Boatswain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I know of no passenger here but yourself.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No others? This thing’s getting worse and worse.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>To the <span class="sc">Ship’s Boy</span>, who comes out of the cabin.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Who went down the companion just now?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Boy.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in38">The ship’s dog, sir!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Passes on.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Look-out.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shouts.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Land close ahead!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Where’s my box? Where’s my trunk?</div>
      <div class="line">All the baggage on deck!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_207">207</span><span class="sc">The Boatswain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">We have more to attend to!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It was nonsense, captain! ’Twas only my joke;—</div>
      <div class="line">As sure as I’m here I will help the cook——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The jib’s blown away!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Mate.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">And there went the foresail!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Boatswain.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shrieks from forward.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Breakers under the bow!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Captain.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">She will go to shivers!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>The ship strikes. Noise and confusion.</i></div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE SECOND.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>Close under the land, among sunken rocks and surf.
The ship sinks. The jolly-boat, with two men in
her, is seen for a moment through the scud. A sea
strikes her; she fills and upsets. A shriek is heard;
then all is silent for a while. Shortly afterwards
the boat appears floating bottom upwards.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> comes to the surface near the boat.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Help! Help! A boat! Help! I’ll be drowned!</div>
      <div class="line">Save me, oh Lord—as saith the text!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Clutches hold of the boat’s keel.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_208">208</span><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Comes up on the other side.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, Lord God—for my children’s sake,</div>
      <div class="line">Have mercy! Let me reach the land!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Seizes hold of the keel.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let go!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">Let go!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">I’ll strike!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">So’ll I!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ll crush you down with kicks and blows!</div>
      <div class="line">Let go your hold! She won’t float two!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I know it! Yield!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Yield you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">Oh yes!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They fight; one of the Cook’s hands is
disabled; he clings on with the other.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Off with that hand!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Oh, kind sir—spare!</div>
      <div class="line in2">Think of my little ones at home</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_209">209</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I need my life far more than you,</div>
      <div class="line">For I am lone and childless still.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let go! You’ve lived, and I am young!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Quick; haste you; sink;—you drag us down.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Have mercy! Yield in heaven’s name!</div>
      <div class="line">There’s none to miss and mourn for you—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>His <a id="corr209.11"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="hands">hand</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_209.11"><ins class="correction" title="hands">hand</ins></a></span> slips; he screams.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I’m drowning!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Seizing him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">By this wisp of hair</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll hold you; say your Lord’s Prayer, quick!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I can’t remember; all turns black——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come, the essentials in a word——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Give us this day——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Skip that part, Cook;</div>
      <div class="line">You’ll get all <em class="gesperrt">you</em> need, safe enough.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Give us this day——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_210">210</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">The same old song!</div>
      <div class="line">’Tis plain you were a cook in life——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>The <span class="sc">Cook</span> slips from his grasp.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Cook.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Sinking.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Give us this day our——</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Disappears.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Amen, lad!</div>
      <div class="line">To the last gasp you were yourself.—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Draws himself up on to the bottom of the boat.</i></div>
      <div class="line">So long as there is life there’s hope——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Strange Passenger.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Catches hold of the boat.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good morning!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Hoy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">I heard you shout.—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s pleasant finding you again.</div>
      <div class="line">Well? So my prophecy came true!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Let go! Let go! ’Twill scarce float <em class="gesperrt">one</em>!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’m striking out with my left leg.</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll float, if only with their tips</div>
      <div class="line">My fingers rest upon this ledge.</div>
      <div class="line">But apropos: your body——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Hush!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_211">211</span><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The rest, of course, is done for, clean——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No more!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in9">Exactly as you please.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Silence.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in6">I am silent.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Satan’s tricks!—</div>
      <div class="line">What now?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">I’m waiting.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Tearing his hair.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">I’ll go mad!—</div>
      <div class="line">What are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Nods.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Friendly.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">What else! Speak!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What think you? Do you know none other</div>
      <div class="line">That’s like me?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">Do I know the devil——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_212">212</span><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>In a low voice.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is it <em class="gesperrt">his</em> way to light a lantern</div>
      <div class="line">For life’s night-pilgrimage through fear?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, come! When once the thing’s cleared up,</div>
      <div class="line">You’d seem a messenger of light?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Friend,—have you <em class="gesperrt">once</em> in each half-year</div>
      <div class="line">Felt all the earnestness of dread?<a id="r112"></a><a href="#f112" class="c012"><sup>[112]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, one’s afraid when danger threatens;—</div>
      <div class="line">But all your words have double meanings.<a id="r113"></a><a href="#f113" class="c012"><sup>[113]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, have you gained but <em class="gesperrt">once</em> in life</div>
      <div class="line">The victory that is given in dread?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Looks at him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Came you to ope for me a door,</div>
      <div class="line">’Twas stupid not to come before.</div>
      <div class="line">What sort of sense is there in choosing</div>
      <div class="line">Your time when seas gape to devour one?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Were, then, the victory more likely</div>
      <div class="line">Beside your hearthstone, snug and quiet?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Perhaps not; but your talk was quizzical.</div>
      <div class="line">How could you fancy it awakening?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_213">213</span><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Where I come from, there smiles are prized</div>
      <div class="line">As highly as pathetic style.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All has its time; what fits the taxman,<a id="r114"></a><a href="#f114" class="c012"><sup>[114]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">So says the text, would damn the bishop.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The host whose dust inurned has slumbered</div>
      <div class="line">Treads not on week-days the cothurnus.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Avaunt thee, bugbear! Man, begone!</div>
      <div class="line">I will not die! I must ashore!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Passenger.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, as for that, be reassured;—</div>
      <div class="line">One dies not midmost of Act Five.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Glides away.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, there he let it out at last;—</div>
      <div class="line">He was a sorry moralist.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE THIRD.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>Churchyard in a high lying mountain parish.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i>A funeral is going on. By the grave, the <span class="sc">Priest</span> and a
gathering of people. The last verse of the psalm
is being sung. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> passes by on the road.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>At the gate.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Here’s a countryman going the way of all flesh.</div>
      <div class="line">God be thanked that it isn’t me.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Enters the churchyard.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_214">214</span><span class="sc">The Priest.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Speaking beside the grave.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Now, when the soul has gone to meet its doom,</div>
      <div class="line">And here the dust lies, like an empty pod,—</div>
      <div class="line">Now, my dear friends, we’ll speak a word or two</div>
      <div class="line">About this dead man’s pilgrimage on earth.</div>
      <div class="line in2">He was not wealthy, neither was he wise,</div>
      <div class="line">His voice was weak, his bearing was unmanly,</div>
      <div class="line">He spoke his mind abashed and faltering,</div>
      <div class="line">He scarce was master at his own fireside;</div>
      <div class="line">He sidled into church, as though appealing</div>
      <div class="line">For leave, like other men, to take his place.</div>
      <div class="line in2">It was from Gudbrandsdale, you know, he came.</div>
      <div class="line">When here he settled he was but a lad;—</div>
      <div class="line">And you remember how, to the very last,</div>
      <div class="line">He kept his right hand hidden in his pocket.</div>
      <div class="line in2">That right hand in the pocket was the feature</div>
      <div class="line">That chiefly stamped his image on the mind,—</div>
      <div class="line">And therewithal his writhing, his abashed</div>
      <div class="line">Shrinking from notice wheresoe’er he went.</div>
      <div class="line in2">But, though he still pursued a path aloof,</div>
      <div class="line">And ever seemed a stranger in our midst,</div>
      <div class="line">You all know what he strove so hard to hide,—</div>
      <div class="line">The hand he muffled had four fingers only.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">I well remember, many years ago,</div>
      <div class="line">One morning; there were sessions held at Lundë.</div>
      <div class="line">’Twas war-time, and the talk in every mouth</div>
      <div class="line">Turned on the country’s sufferings and its fate.</div>
      <div class="line in2">I stood there watching. At the table sat</div>
      <div class="line">The Captain, ’twixt the Bailiff<a id="r115"></a><a href="#f115" class="c012"><sup>[115]</sup></a> and the sergeants;</div>
      <div class="line">Lad after lad was measured up and down,</div>
      <div class="line">Passed, and enrolled, and taken for a soldier.</div>
      <div class="line">The room was full, and from the green outside,</div>
      <div class="line">Where thronged the young folks, loud the laughter rang.</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_215">215</span>A name was called, and forth another stepped,</div>
      <div class="line">One pale as snow upon the glacier’s edge.</div>
      <div class="line">They bade the youth advance; he reached the table;</div>
      <div class="line">We saw his right hand swaddled in a clout;—</div>
      <div class="line">He gasped, he swallowed, battling after words,—</div>
      <div class="line">But, though the Captain urged him, found no voice.</div>
      <div class="line">Ah yes, at last! Then with his cheek aflame,</div>
      <div class="line">His tongue now failing him, now stammering fast</div>
      <div class="line">He mumbled something of a scythe that slipped</div>
      <div class="line">By chance, and shore his finger to the skin.</div>
      <div class="line in1">Straightway a silence fell upon the room.</div>
      <div class="line">Men bandied meaning glances; they made mouths;</div>
      <div class="line">They stoned the boy with looks of silent scorn.</div>
      <div class="line">He felt the hail-storm, but he saw it not.</div>
      <div class="line">Then up the Captain stood, the grey old man;</div>
      <div class="line">He spat, and pointed forth, and thundered “Go!”</div>
      <div class="line in2">And the lad went. On both sides men fell back,</div>
      <div class="line">Till through their midst he had to run the gauntlet.</div>
      <div class="line">He reached the door; from there he took to flight;—</div>
      <div class="line">Up, up he went,—through wood and over hillside,</div>
      <div class="line">Up through the stone-screes, rough, precipitous.</div>
      <div class="line">He had his home up there among the mountains.—</div>
      <div class="line in2">It was some six months later he came here,</div>
      <div class="line">With mother, and betrothed, and little child.</div>
      <div class="line">He leased some ground upon the high hill-side,</div>
      <div class="line">There where the waste lands trend away towards Lomb.</div>
      <div class="line">He married the first moment that he could;</div>
      <div class="line">He built a house; he broke the stubborn soil;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_216">216</span>He throve, as many a cultivated patch</div>
      <div class="line">Bore witness, bravely clad in waving gold.</div>
      <div class="line">At church he kept his right hand in his pocket,—</div>
      <div class="line">But sure I am at home his fingers nine</div>
      <div class="line">Toiled every whit as hard as others’ ten.—</div>
      <div class="line">One spring the torrent washed it all away.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Their lives were spared. Ruined and stripped of all,</div>
      <div class="line">He set to work to make another clearing;</div>
      <div class="line">And, ere the autumn, smoke again arose</div>
      <div class="line">From a new, better-sheltered, mountain farm-house.</div>
      <div class="line">Sheltered? From torrent—not from avalanche;</div>
      <div class="line">Two years, and all beneath the snow lay buried.</div>
      <div class="line in2">But still the avalanche could not daunt his spirit.</div>
      <div class="line">He dug, and raked, and carted—cleared the ground—</div>
      <div class="line">And the next winter, ere the snow-blasts came,</div>
      <div class="line">A third time was his little homestead reared.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Three sons he had, three bright and stirring boys;</div>
      <div class="line">They must to school, and school was far away;—</div>
      <div class="line">And they must clamber, where the hill-track failed,</div>
      <div class="line">By narrow ledges past the headlong scree.</div>
      <div class="line">What did he do? The eldest had to manage</div>
      <div class="line">As best he might, and, where the path was worst,</div>
      <div class="line">His father bound a rope round him to stay him;—</div>
      <div class="line">The others on his back and arms he bore.</div>
      <div class="line in2">Thus he toiled, year by year, till they were men.</div>
      <div class="line">Now might he well have looked for some return.</div>
      <div class="line">In the New World, three prosperous gentlemen</div>
      <div class="line">Their school-going and their father have forgotten.</div>
      <div class="line in2">He was short-sighted. Out beyond the circle</div>
      <div class="line">Of those most near to him he nothing saw.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_217">217</span>To him seemed meaningless as cymbals’ tinkling</div>
      <div class="line">Those words that to the heart should ring like steel.</div>
      <div class="line">His race, his fatherland, all things high and shining,</div>
      <div class="line">Stood ever, to his vision, veiled in mist.</div>
      <div class="line in2">But he was humble, humble, was this man;</div>
      <div class="line">And since that sessions-day his doom oppressed him,</div>
      <div class="line">As surely as his cheeks were flushed with shame,</div>
      <div class="line">And his four fingers hidden in his pocket.—</div>
      <div class="line">Offender ’gainst his country’s laws? Ay, true!</div>
      <div class="line">But there is one thing that the law outshineth</div>
      <div class="line">Sure as the snow-white tent of Glittertind<a id="r116"></a><a href="#f116" class="c012"><sup>[116]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Has clouds, like higher rows of peaks, above it.</div>
      <div class="line">No patriot was he. Both for church and state</div>
      <div class="line">A fruitless tree. But there, on the upland ridge,</div>
      <div class="line">In the small circle where he saw his calling,</div>
      <div class="line"><em class="gesperrt">There</em> he was great, because he was himself.</div>
      <div class="line">His inborn note rang true unto the end.</div>
      <div class="line">His days were as a lute with muted strings.</div>
      <div class="line">And therefore, peace be with thee, silent warrior,</div>
      <div class="line">That fought the peasant’s little fight, and fell!</div>
      <div class="line in2">It is not ours to search the heart and reins;—</div>
      <div class="line">That is no task for dust, but for its ruler;—</div>
      <div class="line">Yet dare I freely, firmly, speak my hope:</div>
      <div class="line">He scarce stands crippled now before his God!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>The gathering disperses. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>
remains behind, alone.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Now <em class="gesperrt">that</em> is what I call Christianity!</div>
      <div class="line">Nothing to seize on one’s mind unpleasantly.—</div>
      <div class="line">And the topic—immovably being oneself,—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_218">218</span>That the pastor’s homily turned upon,—</div>
      <div class="line">Is full, in its essence, of edification.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Looks down upon the grave.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Was it he, I wonder, that hacked through his knuckle</div>
      <div class="line">That day I was out hewing logs in the forest?</div>
      <div class="line">Who knows? If I weren’t standing here with my staff</div>
      <div class="line">By the side of the grave of this kinsman in spirit,</div>
      <div class="line">I could almost believe it was I that slept,</div>
      <div class="line">And heard in a vision my panegyric.—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s a seemly and Christianlike custom indeed</div>
      <div class="line">This casting a so-called memorial glance</div>
      <div class="line">In charity over the life that is ended.</div>
      <div class="line">I shouldn’t at all mind accepting my verdict</div>
      <div class="line">At the hands of this excellent parish priest.</div>
      <div class="line">Ah well, I dare say I have some time left</div>
      <div class="line">Ere the gravedigger comes to invite me to stay with him;—</div>
      <div class="line">And as Scripture has it: What’s best is best,—</div>
      <div class="line">And: Enough for the day is the evil thereof,—<a id="r117"></a><a href="#f117" class="c012"><sup>[117]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">And further: Discount not thy funeral.—</div>
      <div class="line">Ah, the Church, after all, is the true consoler.</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve hitherto scarcely appreciated it;—</div>
      <div class="line">But now I feel clearly how blessëd it is</div>
      <div class="line">To be well assured upon sound authority:</div>
      <div class="line">Even as thou sowest thou shalt one day reap.—</div>
      <div class="line">One must be oneself; for oneself and one’s own</div>
      <div class="line">One must do one’s best, both in great and in small things.</div>
      <div class="line">If the luck goes against you, at least you’ve the honour</div>
      <div class="line">Of a life carried through in accordance with principle.—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_219">219</span>Now homewards! Though narrow and steep the path,</div>
      <div class="line">Though fate to the find may be never so biting—</div>
      <div class="line">Still old Peer Gynt will pursue his own way,</div>
      <div class="line">And remain what he is: poor, but virtuous ever.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Goes out.</i></div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE FOURTH.</h3>

<p class="c022"><i>A hill-side seamed by the dry bed of a torrent. A
ruined mill house beside the stream. The ground
is torn up, and the whole place waste. Further
up the hill, a large farm-house.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i>An auction is going on in front of the farm-house.
There is a great gathering of people, who are
drinking, with much noise. <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> is sitting
on a rubbish-heap beside the mill.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Forward and back, and it’s just as far;</div>
      <div class="line">Out and in, and it’s just as strait.—</div>
      <div class="line">Time wears away and the river gnaws on.</div>
      <div class="line">Go roundabout, the Boyg said;—and here one must.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man Dressed in Mourning.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now there is only rubbish left over.</div>
      <div class="c025"><i>[Catches sight of <span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span>.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Are there strangers here too? God be with you, good friend!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well met! You have lively times here to-day.</div>
      <div class="line">Is’t a christening junket or wedding feast?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Mourning.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’d rather call it a house-warming treat;—</div>
      <div class="line">The bride is laid in a wormy bed.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_220">220</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And the worms are squabbling for rags and clouts.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Mourning.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That’s the end of the ditty; it’s over and done.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">All the ditties end just alike;</div>
      <div class="line">And they’re all old together; I knew ’em as a boy.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad of Twenty.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a casting-ladle.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Just look what a rare thing I’ve been buying!</div>
      <div class="line">In this Peer Gynt cast his silver buttons.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Look at mine, though! The money-bag<a id="r118"></a><a href="#f118" class="c012"><sup>[118]</sup></a> bought for a halfpenny.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Third.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No more, eh? Twopence for the pedlar’s <a id="corr220.16"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="pack">pack!</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_220.16"><ins class="correction" title="pack">pack!</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt? Who was he?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Mourning.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">All I know is this:</div>
      <div class="line">He was kinsman to Death and to Aslak the Smith.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Man in Grey.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re forgetting me, man! Are you mad or drunk?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Mourning.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You forget that at Hegstad was a storehouse door</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_221">221</span><span class="sc">The Man in Grey.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, true; but we know you were never dainty.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Mourning.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If only she doesn’t give Death the slip——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Grey.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Come, kinsman! A dram, for our kinship’s sake!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Mourning.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To the deuce with your kinship! You’re maundering in drink——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Man in Grey.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, rubbish; blood’s never so thin as all that;</div>
      <div class="line">One cannot but feel one’s akin to Peer Gynt.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes off with him.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>To himself.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">One meets with acquaintances.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Calls after the <span class="sc">Man in Mourning.</span></i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Mother that’s dead</div>
      <div class="line">Will be after you, Aslak, if you wet your whistle.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Rises.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The husbandman’s saying seems scarce to hold here:</div>
      <div class="line">The deeper one harrows the better it smells.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a bear’s skin.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Look, the cat of the Dovrë!<a id="r119"></a><a href="#f119" class="c012"><sup>[119]</sup></a> Well, only his fell.</div>
      <div class="line">It was he chased the trolls out on Christmas <a id="corr221.28"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="Eve">Eve.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_221.28"><ins class="correction" title="Eve">Eve.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_222">222</span><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a reindeer skull.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Here is the wonderful reindeer that bore,</div>
      <div class="line">At Gendin, Peer Gynt over edge and scree.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Third.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>With a hammer, calls out to the <span class="sc">Man in Mourning</span>.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hei, Aslak, this sledge-hammer, say, do you know it?</div>
      <div class="line">Was it this that you used when the devil clove the wall?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Fourth.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Empty-handed.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mads Moen, here’s the invisible cloak</div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt and Ingrid flew off through the air with.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Brandy here, boys! I feel I’m grown old;—</div>
      <div class="line">I must put up to auction my rubbish and lumber!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What have you to sell, then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">A palace I have;—</div>
      <div class="line">It lies in the Rondë; it’s solidly built.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A button is bid!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">You must run to a dram.</div>
      <div class="line">’Twere a sin and a shame to bid anything less.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Another.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He’s a jolly old boy this!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>The bystanders crowd around him.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_223">223</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Shouts.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Granë,<a id="r120"></a><a href="#f120" class="c012"><sup>[120]</sup></a> my steed;</div>
      <div class="line">Who bids?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">One of the Crowd.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">Where’s he running?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">Why, far in the west!</div>
      <div class="line">Near the sunset, my lads! Ah, that courser can fly</div>
      <div class="line">As fast, ay, as fast as Peer Gynt could lie.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Voices.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What more have you got?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">I’ve both rubbish and gold!</div>
      <div class="line">I bought it with ruin; I’ll sell it at a loss.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Put it up!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">A dream of a silver-clasped book!</div>
      <div class="line">That you can have for an old hook and eye.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To the devil with dreams!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">Here’s my Kaiserdom!</div>
      <div class="line">I throw it in the midst of you; scramble for it!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lad.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is the crown given in?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_224">224</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Of the loveliest straw.</div>
      <div class="line">It will fit whoever first puts it on.</div>
      <div class="line">Hei, there is more yet! An addled egg!</div>
      <div class="line">A madman’s grey hair! And the Prophet’s beard!</div>
      <div class="line">All these shall be his that will show on the hillside</div>
      <div class="line">A post that has writ on it; Here lies your path!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bailiff.</span><a id="r121"></a><a href="#f121" class="c012"><sup>[121]</sup></a></div>
    <div>[<i>Who has come up.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re carrying on, my good man, so that almost</div>
      <div class="line">I think that your path will lead straight to the lock-up.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Hat in hand.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Quite likely. But, tell me, who was Peer Gynt?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bailiff.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, nonsense——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Your pardon! Most humbly I beg——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bailiff.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, he’s said to have been an abominable liar——<a id="r122"></a><a href="#f122" class="c012"><sup>[122]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A liar——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Bailiff.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">Yes—all that was strong and great</div>
      <div class="line">He made believe always that he had done it.</div>
      <div class="line">But, excuse me, friend—I have other duties——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i>Goes.</i></div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_225">225</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And where is he now, this remarkable man?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">An Elderly Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He fared over seas to a foreign land;</div>
      <div class="line">It went ill with him there, as one well might foresee;—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s many a year now since he was hanged.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hanged! Ay, ay! Why, I thought as much;</div>
      <div class="line">Our lamented Peer Gynt was himself to the last.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Bows.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Good-bye,—and best thanks for to-day’s merry meeting.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Goes a few steps, but stops again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">You joyous youngsters, you comely lasses,—</div>
      <div class="line">Shall I pay my shot with a traveller’s tale?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Several Voices.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes; do you know any?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Nothing more easy.—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He comes nearer; a look of strangeness
comes over him.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I was gold-digging once in San Francisco.</div>
      <div class="line">There were mountebanks swarming all over the town.</div>
      <div class="line">One with his toes could perform on the fiddle;</div>
      <div class="line">Another could dance a Spanish halling<a id="r123"></a><a href="#f123" class="c012"><sup>[123]</sup></a> on his knees;</div>
      <div class="line">A third, I was told, kept on making verses</div>
      <div class="line">While his brain-pan was having a hole bored right through it.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_226">226</span>To the mountebank-meeting came also the devil;—</div>
      <div class="line">Thought <em class="gesperrt">he</em>’d try his luck with the rest of them.</div>
      <div class="line">His talent was this: in a manner convincing,</div>
      <div class="line">He was able to grunt like a flesh-and-blood pig.</div>
      <div class="line">He was not recognised, yet his manners<a id="r124"></a><a href="#f124" class="c012"><sup>[124]</sup></a> attracted.</div>
      <div class="line">The house was well filled; expectation ran high.</div>
      <div class="line">He stepped forth in a cloak with an ample cape to it;</div>
      <div class="line"><span lang="de" xml:lang="de" xml:lang="de"><i>Man <a id="corr226.8"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="mus">muss</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_226.8"><ins class="correction" title="mus">muss</ins></a></span> sich drappiren</i></span>, as the Germans say.</div>
      <div class="line">But under the mantle—what none suspected—</div>
      <div class="line">He’d managed to smuggle a real live pig.</div>
      <div class="line">And now he opened the representation;</div>
      <div class="line">The devil he pinched, and the pig gave voice.</div>
      <div class="line">The whole thing purported to be a fantasia</div>
      <div class="line">On the porcine existence, both free and in bonds;</div>
      <div class="line">And all ended up with a slaughter-house squeal—</div>
      <div class="line">Whereupon the performer bowed low and retired.—</div>
      <div class="line">The critics discussed and appraised the affair;</div>
      <div class="line">The tone of the whole was attacked and defended.</div>
      <div class="line">Some fancied the vocal expression too thin,</div>
      <div class="line">While some thought the death-shriek too carefully studied;</div>
      <div class="line">But all were agreed as to one thing: <i>qua</i> grunt,</div>
      <div class="line">The performance was grossly exaggerated.—</div>
      <div class="line">Now <em class="gesperrt">that</em>, you see, came of the devil’s stupidity</div>
      <div class="line">In not taking the measure of his public first.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He bows and goes off.  A puzzled silence
comes over the crowd.</i></p>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_227">227</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE FIFTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c022"><i>Whitsun Eve.—In the depths of the forest. To the
back, in a clearing, is a hut with a pair of
reindeer horns over the porch-gable.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> is creeping among the undergrowth,
gathering wild onions.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, this is one standpoint. Where is the next?</div>
      <div class="line">One should try all things and choose the best.</div>
      <div class="line">Well, I have done so,—beginning from Cæsar,</div>
      <div class="line">And downwards as far as to Nebuchadnezzar.</div>
      <div class="line">So I’ve had, after all, to go through Bible history;—</div>
      <div class="line">The old boy has come back to his mother again.</div>
      <div class="line">After all it is written: Of the earth art thou come.—</div>
      <div class="line">The main thing in life is to fill one’s belly.</div>
      <div class="line">Fill it with onions? That’s not much good;—</div>
      <div class="line">I must take to cunning, and set out snares.</div>
      <div class="line">There’s water in the beck here; I shan’t suffer thirst;</div>
      <div class="line">And I count as the first ’mong the beasts after all.</div>
      <div class="line">When my time comes to die—as most likely it will,—</div>
      <div class="line">I shall crawl in under a wind-fallen tree;</div>
      <div class="line">Like the bear, I will heap up a leaf-mound above me,</div>
      <div class="line">And I’ll scratch in big print on the bark of the tree:</div>
      <div class="line">Here rests Peer Gynt, that decent soul</div>
      <div class="line">Kaiser o’er all of the other beasts.—</div>
      <div class="line">Kaiser?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Laughs inwardly.</i></div>
      <div class="line in8">Why, you old soothsayer’s-dupe!</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_228">228</span>No Kaiser are you; you are nought but an onion.</div>
      <div class="line">I’m going to peel you now, my good Peer!</div>
      <div class="line">You won’t escape either by begging or howling.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Takes an onion and strips off one coat
after another.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There lies the outermost layer, all torn;</div>
      <div class="line">That’s the shipwrecked man on the jolly-boat’s keel.</div>
      <div class="line">Here’s the passenger layer, scanty and thin;—</div>
      <div class="line">And yet in its taste there’s a tang of Peer Gynt.</div>
      <div class="line">Next underneath is the gold-digger ego;</div>
      <div class="line">The juice is all gone—if it ever had any.</div>
      <div class="line">This coarse-grained layer with the hardened skin</div>
      <div class="line">Is the peltry hunter by Hudson’s Bay.</div>
      <div class="line">The next one looks like a crown;—oh, thanks!</div>
      <div class="line">We’ll throw it away without more ado.</div>
      <div class="line">Here’s the archæologist, short but sturdy,</div>
      <div class="line">And here is the Prophet, juicy and fresh.</div>
      <div class="line">He stinks, as the Scripture has it, of lies,</div>
      <div class="line">Enough to bring the water to an honest man’s eyes.</div>
      <div class="line">This layer that rolls itself softly together</div>
      <div class="line">Is the gentleman, living in ease and good cheer.</div>
      <div class="line">The next one seems sick. There are black streaks upon it;—</div>
      <div class="line">Black symbolises both parsons and niggers.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Pulls off several layers at once.</i></div>
      <div class="line">What an enormous number of swathings!</div>
      <div class="line">Is not the kernel soon coming to light?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Pulls the whole onion to pieces.</i></div>
      <div class="line">I’m blest if it is! To the innermost centre,</div>
      <div class="line">It’s nothing but swathings—each smaller and smaller.—</div>
      <div class="line">Nature is witty!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Throws the fragments away.</i></div>
      <div class="line in17">The devil take brooding!</div>
      <div class="line">If one goes about thinking, one’s apt to stumble.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_229">229</span>Well, <i>I</i> can at any rate laugh at that danger;—</div>
      <div class="line">For here on all fours I am firmly planted.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Scratches his head.</i></div>
      <div class="line">A queer enough business, the whole concern!</div>
      <div class="line">Life, as they say, plays with cards up its sleeve;<a id="r125"></a><a href="#f125" class="c012"><sup>[125]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">But when one snatches at them, they’ve disappeared,</div>
      <div class="line">And one grips something else,—or else nothing at all.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He has come near to the hut; he catches
sight of it and starts.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This hut? On the heath——! Ha!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Rubs his eyes.</i></div>
      <div class="line in32">It seems exactly</div>
      <div class="line">As though I had known this same building before.—</div>
      <div class="line">The reindeer-horns jutting above the gable!—</div>
      <div class="line">A mermaid, shaped like a fish from the navel!—</div>
      <div class="line">Lies! there’s no mermaid!  But nails—and planks,—</div>
      <div class="line">Bars too, to shut out hobgoblin thoughts!—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Singing in the hut.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now all is ready for Whitsun Eve.</div>
      <div class="line">Dearest boy of mine, far away,</div>
      <div class="line in6">Comest thou soon?</div>
      <div class="line in4">Is thy burden heavy,</div>
      <div class="line in6">Take time, take time;—</div>
      <div class="line in6">I will await thee;</div>
      <div class="line in6">I promised of old.<a id="r126"></a><a href="#f126" class="c012"><sup>[126]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_230">230</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Rises, quiet and deadly pale.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">One that’s remembered,—and one that’s forgot.</div>
      <div class="line">One that has squandered,—and one that has saved.—</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, earnest!—and never can the game be played o’er!</div>
      <div class="line">Oh, dread!<a id="r127"></a><a href="#f127" class="c012"><sup>[127]</sup></a>—here was my Kaiserdom!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hurries off-along the wood path.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE SIXTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>Night. A heath, with fir-trees. A forest fire has
been raging; charred tree-trunks are seen stretching
for miles. White mists here and there
clinging to the earth.</i></p>
<p class="c022"><i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> comes running over the heath.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ashes, fog-scuds, dust wind-driven,—</div>
      <div class="line">Here’s enough for building with!</div>
      <div class="line">Stench and rottenness within it;</div>
      <div class="line">All a whited sepulchre.</div>
      <div class="line">Figments, dreams, and still-born knowledge</div>
      <div class="line">Lay the pyramid’s foundation;</div>
      <div class="line">O’er them shall the work mount upwards,</div>
      <div class="line">With its step on step of falsehood.</div>
      <div class="line">Earnest shunned, repentance dreaded,</div>
      <div class="line">Flaunt at the apex like a scutcheon,</div>
      <div class="line">Fill the trump of judgment with their</div>
      <div class="line"><span lang="la" xml:lang="la" xml:lang="la">“Petrus Gyntus Cæsar fecit!”</span></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Listens.</i></div>
      <div class="line">What is this, like children’s weeping?</div>
      <div class="line">Weeping, but half-way to song.—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_231">231</span>Thread-balls<a id="r128"></a><a href="#f128" class="c012"><sup>[128]</sup></a> at my feet are rolling!—</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Kicking at them.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Off with you! You block my path!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Thread-balls.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>On the ground.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We are thoughts;</div>
      <div class="line">Thou shouldst have thought us;—</div>
      <div class="line">Feet to run on</div>
      <div class="line">Thou shouldst have given us!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Going round about.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I have given life to <em class="gesperrt">one</em>;—</div>
      <div class="line">’Twas a bungled, crook-legged thing!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Thread-balls.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We should have soared up</div>
      <div class="line">Like clangorous voices,——</div>
      <div class="line">And here we must trundle</div>
      <div class="line">As grey-yarn thread-balls.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stumbling.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thread-clue! you accursed scamp!</div>
      <div class="line">Would you trip your father’s heels?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Flees.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Withered Leaves.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Flying before the wind.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We are a watchword;</div>
      <div class="line">Thou shouldst have proclaimed us!</div>
      <div class="line">See how thy dozing</div>
      <div class="line">Has wofully riddled us.</div>
      <div class="line">The worm has gnawed <a id="corr231.29"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="us">us.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_231.29"><ins class="correction" title="us">us.</ins></a></span></div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_232">232</span>In every crevice;</div>
      <div class="line">We have never twined us</div>
      <div class="line">Like wreaths round fruitage.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Not in vain your birth, however;—</div>
      <div class="line">but still and serve as manure.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">A Sighing in the Air.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We are songs;</div>
      <div class="line">Thou shouldst have sung us!—</div>
      <div class="line">A thousand times over</div>
      <div class="line">Hast thou cowed us and smothered us.</div>
      <div class="line">Down in thy heart’s pit</div>
      <div class="line">We have lain and waited;—</div>
      <div class="line">We were never called forth.</div>
      <div class="line">Thy gorge we poison!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Poison thee, thou foolish stave!</div>
      <div class="line">Had I time for verse and stuff?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Attempts a short cut.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Dewdrops.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Dripping from the branches.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We are tears</div>
      <div class="line">Unshed for ever.</div>
      <div class="line">Ice-spears, sharp-wounding,</div>
      <div class="line">We could have melted.</div>
      <div class="line">Now the barb rankles</div>
      <div class="line">In the shaggy bosom;—</div>
      <div class="line">The wound is closed over;</div>
      <div class="line">Our power is ended.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thanks;—I wept in Rondë-cloisters,—</div>
      <div class="line">None the less my tail-part smarted!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_233">233</span><span class="sc">Broken Straws.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We are deeds;</div>
      <div class="line">Thou shouldst have achieved us!</div>
      <div class="line">Doubt, the throttler,</div>
      <div class="line">Has crippled and riven us.</div>
      <div class="line">On the Day of Judgment</div>
      <div class="line">We’ll come a-flock,</div>
      <div class="line">And tell the story,—</div>
      <div class="line">Then woe to you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Rascal-tricks! How dare you debit</div>
      <div class="line">What is <em class="gesperrt">negative</em> against me?</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hastens away.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Åse’s Voice.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Far away.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Fie, what a post-boy!</div>
      <div class="line">Hu, you’ve upset me</div>
      <div class="line">Here in the slush, boy!</div>
      <div class="line">Sadly it’s smirched me.—</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve driven me the wrong way.</div>
      <div class="line">Peer, where’s the castle?</div>
      <div class="line">The Fiend has misled you</div>
      <div class="line">With the switch from the <a id="corr233.23"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="cupboard">cupboard.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_233.23"><ins class="correction" title="cupboard">cupboard.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Better haste away, poor fellow!</div>
      <div class="line">With the devil’s sins upon you,</div>
      <div class="line">Soon you’ll faint upon the hillside;—</div>
      <div class="line">Hard enough to bear one’s own sins.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Runs off.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_234">234</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE SEVENTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c028"><i>Another part of the heath.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Sings.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A sexton! A sexton! where are you, hounds?</div>
      <div class="line">A song from braying precentor-mouths:</div>
      <div class="line">Around your hat-brim a mourning band;—</div>
      <div class="line">My dead are many; I must follow their biers!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024"><i><span class="sc">The Button-moulder</span>, with a box of tools and a
large casting-ladle, comes from a side path.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well met, old gaffer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Good evening, friend!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The man’s in a hurry. Why, where is he going?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To a grave-feast.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">Indeed? My sight’s not very good;—</div>
      <div class="line">Excuse me,—your name doesn’t chance to be Peer?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt, as the saying is.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">That I call luck!</div>
      <div class="line">It’s precisely Peer Gynt I am sent for to-night.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_235">235</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re sent for? What do you want?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in35">Why, see here;</div>
      <div class="line">I mould buttons; and you must go into my ladle.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What to do there?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">To be melted up.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To be melted?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Here it is, empty and scoured.</div>
      <div class="line">Your grave is dug ready, your coffin bespoke.</div>
      <div class="line">The worms in your body will live at their ease;—</div>
      <div class="line">But I have orders, without delay,</div>
      <div class="line">On Master’s behalf to fetch in your soul.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It can’t be! Like this, without any warning——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s an old tradition at burials and births</div>
      <div class="line">To appoint in secret the day of the feast,</div>
      <div class="line">With no warning at all to the guest of honour.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, ay, that’s true. All my brain’s awhirl.</div>
      <div class="line">You are——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Why, I told you—a button-moulder.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_236">236</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I see! A pet child has many nicknames.</div>
      <div class="line">So that’s it, Peer; it is there you’re to harbour</div>
      <div class="line">But these, my good man, are most unfair proceedings!</div>
      <div class="line">I’m sure I deserve better treatment than this;—</div>
      <div class="line">I’m not nearly so bad as perhaps you think,—</div>
      <div class="line">Indeed I’ve done more or less good in the world;—</div>
      <div class="line">At worst you may call me a sort of a bungler,—</div>
      <div class="line">But certainly not an exceptional sinner.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why that is precisely the rub, my man;</div>
      <div class="line">You’re no sinner at all in the higher sense;</div>
      <div class="line">That’s why you’re excused all the torture-pangs,</div>
      <div class="line">And, like others, land in the casting-ladle.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Give it what name you please—call it ladle or pool;<a id="r129"></a><a href="#f129" class="c012"><sup>[129]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">Spruce ale and swipes, they are both of them beer.</div>
      <div class="line">Avaunt from me, Satan!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">You can’t be so rude</div>
      <div class="line">As to take my foot for a horse’s hoof?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">On horse’s hoof or on fox’s claws<a id="r130"></a><a href="#f130" class="c012"><sup>[130]</sup></a>—</div>
      <div class="line">Be off; and be careful what you’re about!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My friend, you’re making a great mistake.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_237">237</span>We’re both in a hurry, and so, to save time,</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll explain the reason of the whole affair.</div>
      <div class="line">You are, with your own lips you told me so,</div>
      <div class="line">No sinner on the so-called heroic scale,—</div>
      <div class="line">Scarce middling even——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Ah, now you’re beginning</div>
      <div class="line">To talk common sense——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Just have patience a bit—</div>
      <div class="line">But to call you a good man were going too far.—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, you know I have never laid claim to that.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re nor one thing nor t’other then, only so-so.</div>
      <div class="line">A sinner of really grandiose style</div>
      <div class="line">Is nowadays not to be met on the highways.</div>
      <div class="line">It wants much more than merely to wallow in mire;</div>
      <div class="line">For both vigour and earnestness go to a sin.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, it’s very true that remark of yours;</div>
      <div class="line">One has to lay on, like the old Berserkers.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You, friend, on the other hand, took your sin lightly.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Only outwardly, friend, like a splash of mud.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, we’ll soon be at one now. The sulphur pool</div>
      <div class="line">Is no place for you, who but plashed in the mire.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_238">238</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And in consequence, friend, I may go as I came?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, in consequence, friend, I must melt you up.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What tricks are these that you’ve hit upon</div>
      <div class="line">At home here, while I’ve been in foreign parts?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The custom’s as old as the Snake’s creation;</div>
      <div class="line">It’s designed to prevent loss of good material.</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve worked at the craft—you must know that often</div>
      <div class="line">A casting turns out, to speak plainly, mere dross;</div>
      <div class="line">The buttons, for instance, have sometimes no loop to them.</div>
      <div class="line">What did you do then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Flung the rubbish away.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah, yes; Jon Gynt was well known for a waster,</div>
      <div class="line">So long as he’d aught left in wallet or purse.</div>
      <div class="line">But Master, you see, he is thrifty, he is;</div>
      <div class="line">And that is why he’s so well-to-do.</div>
      <div class="line">He flings nothing away as entirely worthless</div>
      <div class="line">That can be made use of as raw material.</div>
      <div class="line">Now, you were designed for a shining button</div>
      <div class="line">On the vest of the world; but your loop gave way;</div>
      <div class="line">So into the waste-box you needs must go,</div>
      <div class="line">And then, as they phrase it, be merged in the mass.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_239">239</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’re surely not meaning to melt me up,</div>
      <div class="line">With Dick, Tom, and Hal,<a id="r131"></a><a href="#f131" class="c012"><sup>[131]</sup></a> into something new?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That just what I do mean, and nothing else.</div>
      <div class="line">We’ve done it already to plenty of folks.</div>
      <div class="line">At Kongsberg<a id="r132"></a><a href="#f132" class="c012"><sup>[132]</sup></a> they do just the same with coin</div>
      <div class="line">That’s been current so long that its impress is lost.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But this is the wretchedest miserliness!</div>
      <div class="line">My dear good friend, let me get off free;—</div>
      <div class="line">A loopless button, a worn out farthing,—</div>
      <div class="line">What is <em class="gesperrt">that</em> to a man in your Master’s position?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, so long as, and seeing, the spirit is in you,</div>
      <div class="line">You always have value as so much metal.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, I say! No! With both teeth and claws</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll fight against this! Sooner anything else!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But what else? Come now, be reasonable.</div>
      <div class="line">You know you’re not airy enough for heaven——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’m not hard to content; I don’t aim so high;—</div>
      <div class="line">But I won’t be deprived of one doit of my Self.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_240">240</span>Have me judged by the law in the old-fashioned way!</div>
      <div class="line">For a certain time place me with Him of the Hoof;—</div>
      <div class="line">Say a hundred years, come the worst to the worst;</div>
      <div class="line">That, now, is a thing that one surely can bear;</div>
      <div class="line">They say that the torment is moral no more,</div>
      <div class="line">So it can’t be so pyramid-like after all.</div>
      <div class="line">It is, as ’tis written, a mere transition;</div>
      <div class="line">And as the fox said: One waits; there comes</div>
      <div class="line">An hour of deliverance; one lives in seclusion,</div>
      <div class="line">And hopes in the meantime for happier days.—</div>
      <div class="line">But this other notion—to have to be merged,</div>
      <div class="line">Like a mote, in the carcass of some outsider,—</div>
      <div class="line">This casting-ladle business, this Gynt-cessation,—</div>
      <div class="line">It stirs up my innermost soul in revolt!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Bless me, my dear Peer, there is surely no need</div>
      <div class="line">To get so wrought up about trifles like this.</div>
      <div class="line">Yourself you never have been at all;—</div>
      <div class="line">Then what does it matter, your dying right out?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Have <i>I</i> not been——? I could almost laugh!</div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt, then, has been something else, I suppose!</div>
      <div class="line">No, Button-moulder, you judge in the dark.</div>
      <div class="line">If you could but look into my very reins,</div>
      <div class="line">You’d find only Peer there, and Peer all through,—</div>
      <div class="line">Nothing else in the world, no, nor anything more.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s impossible. Here I have got my orders.</div>
      <div class="line">Look, here it is written: Peer Gynt shalt thou summon.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_241">241</span>He has set at defiance his life’s design;</div>
      <div class="line">Clap him into the ladle with other spoilt goods.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What nonsense! They must mean some other person.</div>
      <div class="line">Is it really Peer? It’s not Rasmus, or Jon?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It is many a day since I melted them.</div>
      <div class="line">So come quietly now, and don’t waste my time.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ll be damned if I do! Ay, ’twould be a fine thing</div>
      <div class="line">If it turned out to-morrow some one else was meant.</div>
      <div class="line">You’d better take care what you’re at, my good man!</div>
      <div class="line">Think of the onus you’re taking upon you——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I have it in writing——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">At least give me time!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What good would that do you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in29">I’ll use it to prove</div>
      <div class="line">That I’ve been myself all the days of my life;</div>
      <div class="line">And that’s the question that’s in dispute.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’ll prove it? And how?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_242">242</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">Why, by vouchers and witnesses.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’m sadly afraid Master will not accept them.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Impossible! However, enough for the day<a id="r133"></a><a href="#f133" class="c012"><sup>[133]</sup></a>—!</div>
      <div class="line">My dear man, allow me a loan of myself;</div>
      <div class="line">I’ll be back again shortly. One is born only once,</div>
      <div class="line">And one’s self, as created, one fain would stick to.</div>
      <div class="line">Come, are we agreed?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Very well then, so be it.</div>
      <div class="line">But remember, we meet at the next cross-roads.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="c026">[<i><span class="sc">Peer Gynt</span> runs off.</i></div>

<h3 class="c021">SCENE EIGHTH.</h3>

<p class="c028"><i>A further point on the heath.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Running hard.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Time is money, as the Scripture says.</div>
      <div class="line">If I only knew where the cross-roads are;—</div>
      <div class="line">They may be near and they may be far.</div>
      <div class="line">The earth burns beneath me like red-hot iron.</div>
      <div class="line">A witness! A witness! Oh, where shall I find one?</div>
      <div class="line">It’s almost unthinkable here in the forest.</div>
      <div class="line">The world is a bungle! A wretched arrangement,</div>
      <div class="line">When a right must be proved that is patent as day!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c013"><span class="pageno" id="Page_243">243</span></p><div class="direction">
<p class="c029"><i>An <span class="sc">Old Man</span>, bent with age, with a staff in his hand
and a bag on his back, is trudging in front of
him.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Stops.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Dear, kind sir—a trifle to a houseless soul!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Excuse me; I’ve got no small change in my pocket——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Prince Peer! Oh, to think we should meet again——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who are you?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">You forget the Old Man in the Rondë?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, you’re never——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">The King of the Dovrë, my boy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The Dovrë-King? Really? The Dovrë-King? Speak!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, I’ve come terribly down in the world——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ruined?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">Ay, plundered of every stiver.</div>
      <div class="line">Here am I tramping it, starved as a wolf.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_244">244</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hurrah! Such a witness doesn’t grow on the trees.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My Lord Prince, too, has grizzled a bit since we met.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My dear father-in-law, the years gnaw and wear one.—</div>
      <div class="line">Well well, a truce to all private affairs,—</div>
      <div class="line">And pray, above all things, no family jars.</div>
      <div class="line">I was then a sad madcap——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">Oh yes; oh yes;—</div>
      <div class="line">His Highness was young; and what won’t one do then?</div>
      <div class="line">But his Highness was wise in rejecting his bride.</div>
      <div class="line">He saved himself thereby both worry and shame,</div>
      <div class="line">For since then she’s utterly gone to the bad——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Indeed!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">She has led a deplorable life;<a id="r134"></a><a href="#f134" class="c012"><sup>[134]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">And, just think,—she and Trond are now living together.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Which Trond?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in13">Of the Valfjeld.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">It’s he? Aha;</div>
      <div class="line">It was he I cut out with the sæter-girls.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_245">245</span><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But my grandson has shot up both stout and tall,</div>
      <div class="line">And has flourishing children all over the land——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now, my dear man, spare us this flow of words;—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve something quite different troubling my mind.—</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve got into rather a ticklish position,</div>
      <div class="line">And am greatly in need of a witness or voucher;—</div>
      <div class="line">That’s how you could help me best, father-in-law,</div>
      <div class="line">And I’ll find you a trifle to drink my health.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You don’t say so; can I be of use to his Highness?</div>
      <div class="line">You’ll give me a character, then, in return?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Most gladly. I’m somewhat hard pressed for cash,</div>
      <div class="line">And must cut down expenses in every direction.</div>
      <div class="line">Now hear what’s the matter. No doubt you remember</div>
      <div class="line">That night when I came to the Rondë a-wooing——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Why, of course, my Lord Prince!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">Oh, no more of the Prince!</div>
      <div class="line">But no matter. You wanted, by sheer brute force,</div>
      <div class="line">To bias my sight, with a slit in the lens,</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_246">246</span>And to change me about from Peer Gynt to a troll.</div>
      <div class="line">What did <i>I</i> do then? I stood out against it,—</div>
      <div class="line">Swore I would stand on no feet but my own;</div>
      <div class="line">Love, power, and glory at once I renounced,</div>
      <div class="line">And all for the sake of remaining myself.</div>
      <div class="line">Now this fact, you see, you must swear to in Court——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, I’m blest if I can.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Why, what nonsense is this?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You surely don’t want to compel me to lie?</div>
      <div class="line">You pulled on the troll-breeches, don’t you remember,</div>
      <div class="line">And tasted the mead——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Ay, you lured me seductively;—</div>
      <div class="line">But I flatly declined the decisive test,</div>
      <div class="line">And that is the thing you must judge your man by.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s the end of the ditty that all depends on.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But it ended, Peer, just in the opposite way.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What rubbish is this?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">When you left the Rondë,</div>
      <div class="line">You inscribed my motto upon your escutcheon.<a id="r135"></a><a href="#f135" class="c012"><sup>[135]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_247">247</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What motto?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in12">The potent and sundering word.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The word?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in10">That which severs the whole race of men</div>
      <div class="line">From the troll-folk: <em class="gesperrt">Troll! To thyself be enough!</em></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Recoils a step.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><em class="gesperrt">Enough!</em></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in8">And with every nerve in your body,</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve been living up to it ever since.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What, I? Peer Gynt?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Weeps.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">It’s ungrateful of you!</div>
      <div class="line">You’ve lived as a troll, but have still kept it secret.</div>
      <div class="line">The word I taught you has shown you the way</div>
      <div class="line">To swing yourself up as a man of substance;—</div>
      <div class="line">And now you must needs come and turn up your nose</div>
      <div class="line">At me and the word you’ve to thank for it all.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><em class="gesperrt">Enough!</em> A hill-troll! An egoist!</div>
      <div class="line">This must be all rubbish; that’s perfectly certain!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_248">248</span><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pulls out a bundle of old newspapers.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I daresay you think we don’t take in the papers?</div>
      <div class="line">Wait; here I’ll show you in red and black<a id="r136"></a><a href="#f136" class="c012"><sup>[136]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">How the “Bloksberg Post” eulogises you;</div>
      <div class="line">And the “Heklefjeld Journal” has done the same</div>
      <div class="line">Ever since the winter you left the country.—</div>
      <div class="line">Do you care to read them? You’re <a id="corr248.8"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="welcome">welcome,</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_248.8"><ins class="correction" title="welcome">welcome,</ins></a></span> Peer.</div>
      <div class="line">Here’s an article, look you, signed “Stallion-hoof.”</div>
      <div class="line">And here too is one: “On Troll-Nationalism.”</div>
      <div class="line">The writer points out and lays stress on the truth</div>
      <div class="line">That horns and a tail are of little importance,</div>
      <div class="line">So long as one has but a strip of the hide.</div>
      <div class="line">“Our <em class="gesperrt">enough</em>,” he concludes, “gives the hallmark of trolldom</div>
      <div class="line">To man,”—and proceeds to cite you as an instance.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A hill-troll? I?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Yes, that’s perfectly clear.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Might as well have stayed quietly where I was?</div>
      <div class="line">Might have stayed in the Rondë in comfort and peace?</div>
      <div class="line">Saved my trouble and toil and no end of shoe-leather?</div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt—a troll? Why, it’s rubbish! It’s stuff!</div>
      <div class="line">Good-bye! There’s a halfpenny to buy you tobacco.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_249">249</span><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Nay, my good Prince Peer!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">Let me go! You’re mad,</div>
      <div class="line">Or else doting. Off to the hospital with you!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, that is exactly what I’m in search of.</div>
      <div class="line">But, as I told you, my grandson’s offspring</div>
      <div class="line">Have become overwhelmingly strong in the land,</div>
      <div class="line">And they say that I only exist in books.</div>
      <div class="line">The saw says: One’s kin are unkindest of all;</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve found to my cost that that saying is true.</div>
      <div class="line">It’s cruel to count as mere figment and fable——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My dear man, there are others who share the same fate.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And ourselves we’ve no Mutual Aid Society,</div>
      <div class="line">No alms-box or Penny Savings Bank;—</div>
      <div class="line">In the Rondë, of course, they’d be out of place.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, that curs’d: <em class="gesperrt">To thyself be enough</em> was the word there!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, come now, the Prince can’t complain of the word.</div>
      <div class="line">And if he could manage by hook or by crook——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My man, you have got on the wrong scent entirely;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_250">250</span>I’m myself, as the saying goes, fairly cleaned out<a id="r137"></a><a href="#f137" class="c012"><sup>[137]</sup></a>——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You surely can’t mean it? His Highness a beggar?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Completely. His Highness’s ego’s in pawn.</div>
      <div class="line">And it’s all your fault, you accursed trolls!</div>
      <div class="line">That’s what comes of keeping bad company.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">So there came my hope toppling down from its perch again!</div>
      <div class="line">Good-bye! I had best struggle on to the town——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What would you do there?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Old Man.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">I will go to the theatre.</div>
      <div class="line">The papers are clamouring for national talents——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good luck on your journey; and greet them from me.</div>
      <div class="line">If I can but get free, I will go the same way.</div>
      <div class="line">A farce I will write them, a mad and profound one;</div>
      <div class="line"><a id="corr250.26"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="It’s">Its</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_250.26"><ins class="correction" title="It’s">Its</ins></a></span> name shall be: “<span lang="la" xml:lang="la" xml:lang="la">Sic transit gloria mundi.</span>”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He runs off along the road; the <span class="sc">Old Man</span>
shouts after him.</i></p>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_251">251</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE NINTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c022">[<i>At a cross-road.</i>]</p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer Gynt.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now comes the pinch, Peer, as never before!</div>
      <div class="line">This Dovrish <em class="gesperrt">Enough</em> has passed judgment upon you.</div>
      <div class="line">The vessel’s a wreck; one must float with the spars.</div>
      <div class="line">All else; but to go to the scrap-heap—no, no!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>At the cross-road.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well now, Peer Gynt, have you found your voucher?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is this, then, the cross-road? Well, that is short work!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I can see on your face, as it were on a sign-board,</div>
      <div class="line">The gist of the paper before I have read it.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I got tired of the hunt;—one might lose one’s way——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yes; and what does it lead to, after all?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">True enough; in the wood, and by night as well——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_252">252</span><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There’s an old man, though, trudging. Shall we call him here?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, let him go. He is drunk, my dear fellow!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But perhaps he might——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Hush; no—let him alone!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, shall we begin then?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">One question—just one:</div>
      <div class="line">What is it, at bottom, this “being oneself”?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A singular question, most odd in the mouth</div>
      <div class="line">Of a man who but now——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Come, a straightforward answer.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To be oneself is: to slay oneself.</div>
      <div class="line">But on you that answer is doubtless lost;</div>
      <div class="line">And therefore we’ll say: to stand forth everywhere</div>
      <div class="line">With Master’s intention displayed like a sign-board.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_253">253</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But suppose a man never has come to know</div>
      <div class="line">What Master meant with him?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">He must divine it.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But how oft are divinings beside the mark,—</div>
      <div class="line">Then one’s carried “ad undas”<a id="r138"></a><a href="#f138" class="c012"><sup>[138]</sup></a> in middle career.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That is certain, Peer Gynt; in default of divining</div>
      <div class="line">The cloven-hoofed gentleman finds his best hook.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This matter’s excessively complicated.—</div>
      <div class="line">See here! I no longer plead being myself;—</div>
      <div class="line">It might not be easy to get it proven.</div>
      <div class="line">That part of my case I must look on as lost.</div>
      <div class="line">But just now, as I wandered alone o’er the heath,</div>
      <div class="line">I felt my conscience-shoe pinching me;</div>
      <div class="line">I said to myself: After all, you’re a sinner——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You seem bent on beginning all over again——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, very far from it; a <em class="gesperrt">great</em> one I mean;</div>
      <div class="line">Not only in deeds, but in words and desires.</div>
      <div class="line">I’ve lived a most damnable life abroad——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Perhaps; I must ask you to show me the schedule!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_254">254</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well well, give me time; I will find out a parson,</div>
      <div class="line">Confess with all speed, and then bring you his voucher.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, if you can bring me that, then it is clear</div>
      <div class="line">You may yet escape from the casting-ladle.</div>
      <div class="line">But Peer, I’d my orders——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in28">The paper is old;</div>
      <div class="line">It dates no doubt from a long past period;—</div>
      <div class="line">At one time I lived with disgusting slackness,</div>
      <div class="line">Went playing the prophet, and trusted in Fate.</div>
      <div class="line">Well, may I try?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">But——!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">My dear, good man,</div>
      <div class="line">I’m sure you can’t have so much to do.</div>
      <div class="line">Here, in this district, the air is so bracing,</div>
      <div class="line">It adds an ell to the people’s ages.</div>
      <div class="line">Recollect what the Justedal parson wrote:</div>
      <div class="line">“It’s seldom that any one dies in this valley.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">To the next cross-roads then; but not a step further.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A priest I must catch, if it be with the tongs.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>He starts running.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_255">255</span>
  <h3 class="c021">SCENE TENTH.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c028"><i>A heather-clad hillside with a path following the
windings of the ridge.</i></p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">This may come in useful in many ways,</div>
      <div class="line">Said Esben as he picked up a magpie’s wing.</div>
      <div class="line">Who could have thought one’s account of sins</div>
      <div class="line">Would come to one’s aid on the last night of all?</div>
      <div class="line">Well, whether or no, it’s a ticklish business;</div>
      <div class="line">A move from the frying-pan<a id="r139"></a><a href="#f139" class="c012"><sup>[139]</sup></a> into the fire;—</div>
      <div class="line">But then there’s a proverb of well-tried validity</div>
      <div class="line">Which says that as long as there’s life there is hope.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024"><i><span class="sc">A Lean Person</span> in a priest’s cassock, kilted-up
high, and with a birding-net over his
shoulder, comes hurrying along the ridge.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Who goes there? A priest with a fowling-net!</div>
      <div class="line">Hei, hop! I’m the spoilt child of fortune indeed!</div>
      <div class="line">Good evening, Herr Pastor! the path is bad——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah yes; but what wouldn’t one do for a soul?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Aha! then there’s some one bound heavenwards?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in46">No;</div>
      <div class="line">I hope he is taking a different road.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_256">256</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">May I walk with Herr Pastor a bit of the way?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">With pleasure; I’m partial to company.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I should like to consult you——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30"><i><em class="gesperrt">Heraus!</em></i><a id="r140"></a><a href="#f140" class="c012"><sup>[140]</sup></a> Go ahead!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You see here before you a good sort of man.</div>
      <div class="line">The laws of the state I have strictly observed,</div>
      <div class="line">Have made no acquaintance with fetters or bolts;—</div>
      <div class="line">But it happens at times that one misses one’s footing</div>
      <div class="line">And stumbles——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">Ah yes; that occurs to the best of us.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Now these trifles you see——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Only trifles?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in41">Yes;</div>
      <div class="line">From sinning <i>en gros</i><a href="#f140" class="c012"><sup>[140]</sup></a> I have ever refrained.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh then, my dear fellow, pray leave me in peace;—</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_257">257</span>I’m not the person you seem to think me.—</div>
      <div class="line">You look at my fingers: What see you in them?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A nail-system somewhat extremely developed.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And now? You are casting a glance at my feet?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pointing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That’s a natural hoof?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">So I flatter myself.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Raises his hat.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’d have taken my oath you were simply a parson;</div>
      <div class="line">And I find I’ve the honour——. Well, best is best;—</div>
      <div class="line">When the hall door stands wide,—shun the kitchen way;</div>
      <div class="line">When the king’s to be met with,—avoid the lackey.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Your hand! You appear to be free from prejudice.</div>
      <div class="line">Say on then, my friend; in what way can I serve you?</div>
      <div class="line">Now you mustn’t ask me for wealth or power;</div>
      <div class="line">I couldn’t supply them although I should hang for it.</div>
      <div class="line">You can’t think how slack the whole business is;—</div>
      <div class="line">Transactions have dwindled most pitiably.</div>
      <div class="line">Nothing doing in souls; only now and again</div>
      <div class="line">A stray one——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_258">258</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">The race has improved so remarkably?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">No, just the reverse; it’s sunk shamefully low;—</div>
      <div class="line">The majority end in a casting-ladle.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ah yes—I have heard that ladle mentioned;</div>
      <div class="line">In fact, ’twas the cause of my coming to you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Speak out!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in11">If it were not too much to ask,</div>
      <div class="line">I should like——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in18">A harbour of refuge? eh?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You’ve guessed my petition before I have asked.</div>
      <div class="line">You tell me the business is going awry;</div>
      <div class="line">So I daresay you will not be over-particular.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But, my dear——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in17">My demands are in no way excessive.</div>
      <div class="line">I shouldn’t insist on a salary;</div>
      <div class="line">But treatment as friendly as things will permit.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A fire in your room?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_259">259</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Not too much fire;—and chiefly</div>
      <div class="line">The power of departing in safety and peace,—</div>
      <div class="line">The right, as the phrase goes, of freely withdrawing</div>
      <div class="line">Should an opening offer for happier days.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My dear friend, I vow I’m sincerely distressed;</div>
      <div class="line">But you cannot imagine how many petitions</div>
      <div class="line">Of similar purport good people send in,</div>
      <div class="line">When they’re quitting the scene of their earthly activity.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But now that I think of my past career,</div>
      <div class="line">I feel I’ve an absolute claim to admission——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">’Twas but trifles, you said——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">In a certain sense;—</div>
      <div class="line">But, now I remember, I’ve trafficked in slaves——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">There are men that have trafficked in wills and souls,</div>
      <div class="line">But who bungled it so that they failed to get in.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I’ve shipped Bramah-figures in plenty to China.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Mere wish-wash again! Why, we laugh at such things.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_260">260</span>There are people that ship off far gruesomer figures</div>
      <div class="line">In sermons, in art, and in literature,</div>
      <div class="line">Yet have to stay out in the cold——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in37">Ah, but then,</div>
      <div class="line">Do you know—I once went and set up as a prophet!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">In foreign parts? Humbug! Why most people’s <i>Sehen</i></div>
      <div class="line"><i>Ins Blaue</i><a id="r141"></a><a href="#f141" class="c012"><sup>[141]</sup></a> ends in the casting-ladle.</div>
      <div class="line">If you’ve no more than that to rely upon,</div>
      <div class="line">With the best of good will, I can’t possibly house you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But hear this: In a shipwreck—I clung to a boat’s keel,—</div>
      <div class="line">And it’s written: A drowning man grasps at a straw,—</div>
      <div class="line">Furthermore it is written: You’re nearest yourself,—</div>
      <div class="line">So I half-way divested a cook of his life.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It were all one to me if a kitchen-maid</div>
      <div class="line">You had half-way divested of something else.</div>
      <div class="line">What sort of stuff is this half-way jargon,</div>
      <div class="line">Saving your presence? Who, think you, would care</div>
      <div class="line">To throw away dearly-bought fuel, in times</div>
      <div class="line">Like these, on such spiritless rubbish as this?</div>
      <div class="line">There now, don’t be enraged; ’twas your sins that I scoffed at;</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_261">261</span>And excuse my speaking my mind so bluntly.—</div>
      <div class="line">Come, my dearest friend, banish this stuff from your head,<a id="r142"></a><a href="#f142" class="c012"><sup>[142]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="line">And get used to the thought of the casting-ladle.</div>
      <div class="line">What would you gain if I lodged you and boarded you?</div>
      <div class="line">Consider; I know you’re a sensible man.</div>
      <div class="line">Well, you’d keep your memory; that’s so far true;—</div>
      <div class="line">But the retrospect o’er recollection’s domain</div>
      <div class="line">Would be, both for heart and for intellect,</div>
      <div class="line">What the Swedes call “Mighty poor sport”<a id="r143"></a><a href="#f143" class="c012"><sup>[143]</sup></a> indeed.</div>
      <div class="line">You have nothing either to howl or to smile about;</div>
      <div class="line">No cause for rejoicing nor yet for despair;</div>
      <div class="line">Nothing to make you feel hot or cold;</div>
      <div class="line">Only a sort of a something to fret over.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It is written: It’s never so easy to know</div>
      <div class="line">Where the shoe is tight that one isn’t wearing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Very true; I have—praise be to so-and-so!—</div>
      <div class="line">No occasion for more than a single odd shoe.</div>
      <div class="line">But it’s lucky we happened to speak of shoes;</div>
      <div class="line">It reminds me that I must be hurrying on;—</div>
      <div class="line">I’m after a roast that I hope will prove fat;</div>
      <div class="line">So I really mustn’t stand gossiping here.—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And may one inquire, then, what sort of sin-diet</div>
      <div class="line">The man has been fattened on?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_262">262</span><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in30">I understand</div>
      <div class="line">He has been himself both by night and by day,</div>
      <div class="line">And that, after all, is the principal point.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Himself? Then do such folks belong to your parish?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">That depends; the door, at least, stands ajar for them.</div>
      <div class="line">Remember, in two ways a man can be</div>
      <div class="line">Himself—there’s a right and wrong side to the jacket.</div>
      <div class="line">You know they have lately discovered in Paris</div>
      <div class="line">A way to take portraits by help of the sun.</div>
      <div class="line">One can either produce a straightforward picture</div>
      <div class="line">Or else what is known as a negative one.</div>
      <div class="line">In the latter the lights and the shades are reversed,</div>
      <div class="line">And they’re apt to seem ugly to commonplace eyes;</div>
      <div class="line">But for all that the likeness is latent in them,</div>
      <div class="line">And all you require is to bring it out.</div>
      <div class="line">If, then, a soul shall have pictured itself</div>
      <div class="line">In the course of its life by the negative method,</div>
      <div class="line">The plate is not therefore entirely cashiered,—</div>
      <div class="line">But without more ado they consign it to me.</div>
      <div class="line">For ulterior treatment I take it in hand,</div>
      <div class="line">And by suitable methods effect its development.</div>
      <div class="line">I steam it, I dip it, I burn it, I scour it,</div>
      <div class="line">With sulphur and other ingredients like that,</div>
      <div class="line">Till the image appears which the plate was designed for,—</div>
      <div class="line">That, namely, which people call positive.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_263">263</span>But for one who, like you, has smudged himself out,</div>
      <div class="line">Neither sulphur nor potash avails in the least.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I see; one must come to you black as a raven</div>
      <div class="line">To turn out a white ptarmigan? Pray what’s the name</div>
      <div class="line">Inscribed ’neath the negative counterfeit</div>
      <div class="line">That you’re now to transfer to the positive side?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The name’s Peter<a id="r144"></a><a href="#f144" class="c012"><sup>[144]</sup></a> Gynt.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in26">Peter Gynt? Indeed?</div>
      <div class="line">Is Herr Gynt himself?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in22">Yes, he vows he is.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, he’s one to be trusted, that same Herr Peter.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">You know him, perhaps?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">Oh yes, after a fashion;—</div>
      <div class="line">One knows all sorts of people.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in31">I’m pressed for time;</div>
      <div class="line">Where saw you him last?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_264">264</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">It was down at the Cape.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line"><span lang="it" xml:lang="it" xml:lang="it">Di Buona Speranza?</span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in19">Just so; but he sails</div>
      <div class="line">Very shortly again, if I’m not <a id="corr264.7"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="mistaken">mistaken.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_264.7"><ins class="correction" title="mistaken">mistaken.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Lean One.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I must hurry off then without delay.</div>
      <div class="line">I only hope I may catch him in time!</div>
      <div class="line">That Cape of Good Hope—I could never abide it;—</div>
      <div class="line">It’s ruined by missionaries from Stavanger.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>He rushes off southwards.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The stupid hound! There he takes to his heels</div>
      <div class="line">With his tongue lolling out. He’ll be finely sold.</div>
      <div class="line">It delights me to humbug an ass like that.</div>
      <div class="line">He to give himself airs, and to lord it forsooth!</div>
      <div class="line">He’s a mighty lot, truly, to swagger about!</div>
      <div class="line">He’ll scarcely grow fat at his present trade;—</div>
      <div class="line">He’ll soon drop from his perch with his whole apparatus.—</div>
      <div class="line">H’m, I’m not over-safe in the saddle either;</div>
      <div class="line">I’m expelled, one may say, from self-owning nobility.<a id="r145"></a><a href="#f145" class="c012"><sup>[145]</sup></a></div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>A shooting star is seen; he nods after it.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Greet all friends from Peer Gynt, Brother Starry-Flash!</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_265">265</span>To flash forth, to go out, and be naught at a gulp—</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Pulls himself together as though in terror,
and goes deeper in among the mists; stillness
for awhile; then he cries</i>:</p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Is there no one, no one in all the whirl,—</div>
      <div class="line">In the void no one, and no one in heaven—!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He comes forward again further down,
throws his hat upon the ground, and tears
at his hair. By degrees a stillness comes
over him.</i></p>
</div>
<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">So unspeakably poor, then, a soul can go</div>
      <div class="line">Back to nothingness, into the grey of the mist.</div>
      <div class="line">Thou beautiful earth, be not angry with me</div>
      <div class="line">That I trampled thy grasses to no avail.</div>
      <div class="line">Thou beautiful sun, thou hast squandered away</div>
      <div class="line">Thy glory of light in an empty hut.</div>
      <div class="line">There was no one within it to hearten and warm;—</div>
      <div class="line">The owner, they tell me, was never at home.</div>
      <div class="line">Beautiful sun and beautiful earth,</div>
      <div class="line">You were foolish to bear and give light to my mother.</div>
      <div class="line">The spirit is niggard and nature lavish;</div>
      <div class="line">And dearly one pays for one’s birth with one’s life.—</div>
      <div class="line">I will clamber up high, to the dizziest peak;</div>
      <div class="line">I will look once more on the rising sun,</div>
      <div class="line">Gaze till I’m tired o’er the promised land;</div>
      <div class="line">Then try to get snowdrifts piled up over me.</div>
      <div class="line">They can write above them: “Here <em class="gesperrt">No One</em> lies buried”;</div>
      <div class="line">And afterwards,—then——! Let things go as they can.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Church-goers.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Singing on the forest path.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, morning thrice blest,</div>
      <div class="line">When the tongues of God’s kingdom</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_266">266</span>Struck the earth like to flaming steel!</div>
      <div class="line">From the earth to his dwelling</div>
      <div class="line">Now the heirs’ song ascendeth</div>
      <div class="line">In the tongue of the kingdom of God.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Crouches as in terror.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Never look there! <em class="gesperrt">there</em> all’s desert and waste.—</div>
      <div class="line">I fear I was dead long before I died.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Tries to slink in among the bushes, but
comes upon the cross-roads.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Good morning, Peer Gynt! Where’s the list of your sins?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Do you think that I haven’t been whistling and shouting</div>
      <div class="line">As hard as I could?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in20">And met no one at all?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Not a soul but a tramping photographer.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, the respite is over.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in27">Ay, everything’s over.</div>
      <div class="line">The owl smells the daylight. Just list to the hooting!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">It’s the matin-bell ringing——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_267">267</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Pointing.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in32">What’s that shining yonder?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Only light from a hut.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in23">And that wailing sound——?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But a woman singing.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in21">Ay, there—there I’ll find</div>
      <div class="line">The list of my sins——</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Seizing him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in24">Set your house in order!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>They have come out of the underwood, and
are standing near the hut. Day is
dawning.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Set my house in order? It’s there! Away.</div>
      <div class="line">Get you gone! Though your ladle were huge as a coffin,</div>
      <div class="line">It were too small, I tell you, for me and my <a id="corr267.23"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="sins">sins.</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_267.23"><ins class="correction" title="sins">sins.</ins></a></span></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Well, to the third cross-road, Peer; but then——.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Turns aside and goes.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Approaches the hut.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Forward and back, and it’s just as far.</div>
      <div class="line"><span class="pageno" id="Page_268">268</span>Out and in, and it’s just as strait.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Stops.</i></div>
      <div class="line">No!—like a wild, an unending lament,</div>
      <div class="line">Is the thought: to come back, to go in, to go home.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Takes a few steps on, but stops again.</i></div>
      <div class="line">Round about, said the Boyg!</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Hears singing in the hut.</i></div>
      <div class="line in28">Ah no; this time at least</div>
      <div class="line">Right through, though the path may be never so strait!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>He runs towards the hut; at the same
moment <span class="sc">Solveig</span> appears in the doorway,
dressed for church, with a psalm-book
wrapped in a kerchief, and a staff in her
hand. She stands there erect and mild.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Flings himself down on the threshold.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Hast thou doom for a sinner, then speak it forth!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">He is here! He is here! Oh, to God be the praise!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Stretches out her arms as though groping
for him.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Cry out all my sins and my trespasses!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">In nought hast thou sinned, oh my own only boy.</div>
      <div class="c025">[<i>Gropes for him again, and finds him.</i></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Behind the house.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The sin-list, Peer Gynt?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_269">269</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Cry aloud my crime!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Sits down beside him.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thou hast made all my life as a beautiful song.</div>
      <div class="line">Blessëd be thou that at last thou hast come!</div>
      <div class="line">Blessëd, thrice blessëd our Whitsun-morn meeting!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Then I am lost!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in16">There is one that rules all things.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Laughs.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Lost! Unless thou canst answer riddles.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Tell me them.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in14">Tell them! Come on! To be sure!</div>
      <div class="line">Canst thou tell where Peer Gynt has been since we parted?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Been?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in6">With his destiny’s seal on his brow;</div>
      <div class="line">Been, as in God’s thought he first sprang forth!</div>
      <div class="line">Canst thou tell me? If not, I must get me home,—</div>
      <div class="line">Go down to the mist-shrouded regions.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Smiling.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oh, that riddle is easy.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="pageno" id="Page_270">270</span><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in25">Then tell what thou knowest!</div>
      <div class="line">Where was I, as myself, as the whole man, the true man?</div>
      <div class="line">Where was I, with God’s sigil upon my brow?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">In my faith, in my hope, and in my love.<a id="r146"></a><a href="#f146" class="c012"><sup>[146]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Starts back.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">What sayest thou——? Peace! These are juggling words.</div>
      <div class="line">Thou art mother thyself to the man that’s there.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ay, that I am; but who is his father?</div>
      <div class="line">Surely he that forgives at the mother’s prayer.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Peer.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>A light shines in his face; he cries</i>:]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">My mother; my wife; oh, thou innocent woman!—</div>
      <div class="line">In thy love—oh, there hide me, hide me!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="direction">
<p class="c024">[<i>Clings to her end hides his face in her lap.
A long silence. The sun rises.</i></p>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Sings softly.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Sleep thou, dearest boy of mine!</div>
      <div class="line">I will cradle thee, I will watch thee——</div>
      <div class="line in2"><span class="pageno" id="Page_271">271</span>The boy has been sitting on his mother’s lap.</div>
      <div class="line">They two have been playing all the life-day long.</div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">The boy has been resting at his mother’s breast</div>
      <div class="line">All the life-day long. God’s blessing on my joy!</div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">The boy has been lying close in to my heart</div>
      <div class="line">All the life-day long. He is weary now.</div>
    </div>
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">Sleep thou, dearest boy of mine!</div>
      <div class="line">I will cradle thee, I will watch thee.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">The Button-moulder’s voice.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Behind the house.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">At the last cross-road we will meet again, Peer;</div>
      <div class="line">And <em class="gesperrt">then</em> we’ll see whether——; I say no more.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c000">
    <div><span class="sc">Solveig.</span></div>
    <div>[<i>Sings louder in the full daylight.</i>]</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="lg-container-l c023">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line in2">I will cradle thee, I will watch thee;</div>
      <div class="line">Sleep and dream thou, dear my boy!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f109">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r109">109</a>. Mountains and glaciers.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f110">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r110">110</a>. Mountains and glaciers.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f111">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r111">111</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f112">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r112">112</a>. “Angst”—literally, “dread” or “terror”—probably means
here something like “conviction of sin.” The influence of the
Danish theologian, Sören Kierkegård, may be traced in this
passage.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f113">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r113">113</a>. Literally, “Are set on screws.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f114">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r114">114</a>. “Tolder,” the biblical “publican.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f115">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r115">115</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f60">95</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f116">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r116">116</a>. A mountain in the Jotunheim. The name means “glittering
peak.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f117">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r117">117</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Den tid den sorg”</span>—literally, “That time that sorrow” or
“care.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f118">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r118">118</a>. Literally “the bushel.” See note, p. <a href="#f27">11</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f119">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r119">119</a>. See Appendix.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f120">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r120">120</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f62">114</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f121">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r121">121</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f60">95</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f122">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r122">122</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Digter”</span>; means also “poet.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f123">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r123">123</a>. See footnotes, pp. <a href="#f31">29</a> and <a href="#f34">30</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f124">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r124">124</a>. In the original, <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Personlighed”</span>—personality.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f125">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r125">125</a>. This and the following line, literally translated, run thus:
<a id="corr229.34"></a><span class="htmlonly"><ins class="correction" title="Life">“Life</ins></span><span class="epubonly"><a href="#c_229.34"><ins class="correction" title="Life">“Life</ins></a></span>, as it’s called, has a fox behind its ear. But when one
grasps at him, Reynard takes to his heels.” “To have a fox
behind the ear” is a proverbial expression for insincerity,
double-dealing.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f126">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r126">126</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f97">171</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f127">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r127">127</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f112">212</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f128">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r128">128</a>. See Introduction.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f129">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r129">129</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Pöl,”</span> otherwise <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Svovlpöl”</span>—the sulphur pool of hell.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f130">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r130">130</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f125">229</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f131">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r131">131</a>. Literally, “With Peter and Paul.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f132">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r132">132</a>. The Royal Mint is at Kongsberg, a town in southern
Norway.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f133">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r133">133</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f117">218</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f134">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r134">134</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Hun gik nu for koldt vand og lud”</span>—literally, “to live on
cold water and lye”—to live wretchedly and be badly treated.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f135">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r135">135</a>. Literally, “Wrote my motto behind your ear.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f136">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r136">136</a>. Clearly the troll-substitute for “in black and white.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f137">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r137">137</a>. Literally, “On a naked hill.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f138">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r138">138</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f139">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r139">139</a>. Literally, “the ashes.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f140">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r140">140</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f141">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r141">141</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f142">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r142">142</a>. Literally, “knock out that tooth.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f143">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r143">143</a>. “Bra litet rolig.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f144">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r144">144</a>. So in original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f145">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r145">145</a>. “<i>Selv</i>ejer-Adlen.” “Selvejer” (literally, “self-owner”) means
a freeholder, as opposed to a “husmand” or tenant. There is
of course a play upon words in the original.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f146">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r146">146</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“I min Tro, i mit Håb og i min Kjærlighed.”</span></p>

<p class="c001">We have entirely sacrificed the metre of the line, feeling it
impossible to mar its simplicity by any padding. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Kjærlighed”</span>
also means “charity,” in the biblical sense.</p>
</div>
<hr class="c018" />

<div class="nf-center-c0">
  <div class="nf-center">
    <div>THE END.</div>
  </div>
</div>

<span class="pageno" id="Page_272">272</span>

</div>

<div class="chapter">
  <h2 class="c008">APPENDIX.</h2>
</div>

<p class="c011">[The stories of Peer Gynt and Gudbrand Glesnë
both occur in Asbjörnsen’s “Reindeer-hunting in the
Rondë Hills” (<span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no"><cite>Norske Huldre-Eventyr og Folkesagn</cite></span>,
Christiania, 1848). They are told by the peasant
guides or gillies who accompany a shooting-party into
the mountains—the first by Peer Fugleskjelle, the
second by Thor Ulvsvolden. Our translation of
Asbjörnsen’s “Peer Gynt” is based on Mr. H. L.
Brækstad’s version, published in <i>Round the Yule Log</i>,
London, 1881.]</p>

<h3 class="c021">PEER GYNT.</h3>

<p class="c013">In the old days there lived in Kvam a hunter, whose
name was Peer Gynt. He was always up in the
mountains shooting bears and elks; for in those days
there were more forests on the mountains to harbour
such wild beasts. One time, late in the autumn,
long after the cattle had been driven home, Peer set
out for the hills. Every one had left the uplands
except three sæter-girls. When Peer came up towards
Hövring, where he was to pass the night in a sæter, it
was so dark that he could not see his fist before him,
and the dogs fell to barking and baying so that it was
quite uncanny. All of a sudden he ran against something,
and when he put his hand out he felt it was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_273">273</span>cold and slippery and big. Yet he did not seem to
have strayed from the road, so he couldn’t think what
this could be; but unpleasant it was at any rate.</p>

<p class="c001">“Who is it?” asked Peer, for he felt it moving.</p>

<p class="c001">“Oh, it’s the Boyg,”<a id="r147"></a><a href="#f147" class="c012"><sup>[147]</sup></a> was the answer.</p>

<p class="c001">Peer was no wiser for this, but skirted along it for a
bit, thinking that somewhere he must be able to pass.
Suddenly he ran against something again, and when
he put out his hand, it too was big, and cold, and
slippery.</p>

<p class="c001">“Who is it?” asked Peer Gynt.</p>

<p class="c001">“Oh, it’s the Boyg,” was the answer again.</p>

<p class="c001">“Well, straight or crooked, you’ll have to let me
pass,” said Peer; for he understood that he was
walking in a ring, and that the Boyg had curled itself
round the sæter. Thereupon it shifted a little, so
that Peer got past. When he came inside the sæter,
it was no lighter there than outside. He was feeling
along the wall for a place to hang up his gun and his
bag; but as he was groping his way forward he again
felt something cold, and big, and slippery.
—
“Who is it?” shouted Peer.</p>

<p class="c001">“Oh, it’s the great Boyg,” was the answer. Where-ever
he put his hands out or tried to get past, he felt
the Boyg encircling him.</p>

<p class="c001">“It’s not very pleasant to be here,” thought Peer,
“since this Boyg is both out and in; but I think I
can make short work of the nuisance.”</p>

<p class="c001">So he took his gun and went out again, groping his
way till he found the creature’s head.</p>

<p class="c001">“What are you?” asked Peer.</p>

<p class="c001">“Oh, I am the big Boyg from Etnedale,” said the
Troll-Monster. Peer did not lose a moment, but
fired three shots right into its head.</p>

<p class="c001"><span class="pageno" id="Page_274">274</span>“Fire another,” said the Boyg. But Peer knew
better; if he had fired another shot, the bullet would
have rebounded against himself.</p>

<p class="c001">Thereupon Peer and his dogs took hold of the
Troll-Monster and dragged him out, so that they
could get into the sæter. Meanwhile there was
jeering and laughing in all the hills around.</p>

<p class="c001">“Peer Gynt dragged hard, but the dogs dragged
harder,” said a voice.</p>

<p class="c001">Next morning he went out stalking. When he
came out on the uplands he saw a girl, who was calling
some sheep up a hillside. But when he came to the
place the girl was gone and the sheep too, and he saw
nothing but a great flock of bears.</p>

<p class="c001">“Well, I never saw bears in a flock before,” thought
Peer to himself. When he came nearer, they had all
disappeared except one.</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c014">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“Look after your pig:</div>
      <div class="line">Peer Gynt is out</div>
      <div class="line">with his gun so big,”<a id="r148"></a><a href="#f148" class="c012"><sup>[148]</sup></a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c015">shouted a voice over in a hillock.</p>

<p class="c001">“Oh, it’ll be a bad business for Peer, but not for
my pig; for he hasn’t washed himself to-day,” said
another voice in the hill. Peer washed his hands
with the water he had, and shot the bear. There was
more laughter and jeering in the hill.</p>

<p class="c001">“You should have looked after your pig!” cried a
voice.</p>

<p class="c001">“I didn’t remember he had a water-jug between
his legs,” answered the other.</p>

<p class="c001">Peer skinned the bear and buried the carcass among
the stones, but the head and the hide he took with
him. On his way home he met a fox.</p>

<p class="c001"><span class="pageno" id="Page_275">275</span>“Look at my lamb, how fat it is,” said a voice in a
hill.</p>

<p class="c001">“Look at that gun<a id="r149"></a><a href="#f149" class="c012"><sup>[149]</sup></a> of Peer’s, how high it is,” said
a voice in another hill, just as Peer took aim and shot
the fox. He skinned the fox and took the skin with
him, and when he came to the sæter he put the heads
on the wall outside, with their jaws gaping. Then he
lighted a fire and put a pot on to boil some soup, but
the chimney smoked so terribly that he could scarcely
keep his eyes open, and so he had to set wide a small
window. Suddenly a Troll came and poked his nose
in through the window; it was so long that it reached
across the room to the fireplace.</p>

<p class="c001">“Here’s a proper snout for you to see,” said the Troll.</p>

<p class="c001">“And here’s proper soup for you to taste,” said Peer
Gynt; and he poured the whole potful of soup over
the Troll’s nose. The Troll ran away howling; but
in all the hills around there was jeering and laughing
and voices shouting—</p>

<p class="c001">“Soup-snout Gyri! Soup-snout Gyri!”</p>

<p class="c001">All was quiet now for a while; but before long
there was a great noise and hubbub outside again.
Peer looked out and saw that there was a cart there,
drawn by bears. They hoisted up the Troll-Monster,
and carted him away into the mountain. Just then a
bucket of water came down the chimney and put out
the fire, so that Peer was left in the dark. Then a
jeering and laughing began in all the corners of the
room, and a voice said—</p>

<p class="c001">“It’ll go no better with Peer now than with the
sæter-girls at Vala.”</p>

<p class="c001">Peer made up the fire again, took his dogs with
him, shut up the house, and set off northward to the
Vala sæter, where the three girls were. When he had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_276">276</span>gone some distance he saw such a glare of light that
it seemed to him the sæter must be on fire. Just
then he came across a pack of wolves; some of them
he shot, and some he knocked on the head. When he
came to the Vala sæter he found it pitch dark; there
was no sign of any fire; but there were four strangers
in the house carrying on with the sæter-girls. They
were four Hill-Trolls, and their names were Gust of
Værë, Tron of the Valfjeld, Tjöstöl Aabakken, and
Rolf Eldförpungen. Gust of Værë was standing at
the door to keep watch, while the others were in with
the girls courting. Peer fired at Gust, but missed
him, and Gust ran away. When Peer came inside he
found the Trolls carrying on desperately with the
girls. Two of the girls were terribly frightened and
were saying their prayers, but the third, who was
called Mad Kari, wasn’t afraid; she said they might
come there for all she cared; she would like to see
what stuff there was in such fellows. But when the
Trolls found that Peer was in the room they began to
howl, and told Eldförpungen to make up the fire.
At that instant the dogs set upon Tjöstöl and pulled
him over on his back into the fireplace, so that the
ashes and sparks flew up all round him.</p>

<p class="c001">“Did you see my snakes, Peer?” asked Tron of
the Valfjeld—that was what he called the wolves.</p>

<p class="c001">“You shall go the same way as your snakes,” said
Peer, and shot him; and then he killed Aabakken
with the butt-end of his rifle. Eldförpungen had
escaped up the chimney. After this Peer took the
girls back to their homes, for they didn’t dare to stay
any longer up at the sæter.</p>

<p class="c001">Shortly before Christmas-time Peer set out again.
He had heard of a farm on the Dovrefjeld which was
invaded by such a number of Trolls every Christmas-eve
<span class="pageno" id="Page_277">277</span>that the people of the farm had to turn out and
get shelter with some of their neighbours. He was
anxious to go there, for he was very keen upon the
Trolls. He dressed himself in some old ragged
clothes, and took with him a tame white bear that he
had, as well as an awl, some pitch, and waxed twine.
When he came to the farm he went in and begged for
houseroom.</p>

<p class="c001">“God help us!” said the farmer; “we can’t put
you up. We have to clear out of the house ourselves,
for every blessed Christmas-eve the whole place is
full of Trolls.”</p>

<p class="c001">But Peer Gynt said he thought he should be able
to clear the house of Trolls; and then he got leave
to stay, and they gave him a pig’s skin into the
bargain. The bear lay down behind the fireplace,
and Peer took out his awl, and pitch, and twine, and
set to making a big shoe, that took the whole pig’s
skin. He put a strong rope in for laces, so that he
could pull the shoe tight together at the top; and he
had a couple of handspikes ready.</p>

<p class="c001">All of a sudden the Trolls came, with a fiddle and
a fiddler; some began dancing, while others fell to
eating the Christmas fare on the table; some fried
bacon, and some fried frogs and toads, and other
disgusting things: these were the Christmas dainties
they had brought with them. In the meantime some
of the Trolls found the shoe Peer had made; they
thought it must be for a very big foot. Then they
all wanted to try it on; and when each of them had
put a foot into it, Peer tightened the rope, shoved
one of the handspikes into it, and twisted it up till
they were all stuck fast in the shoe.</p>

<p class="c001">Just then the bear put his nose out and smelt
the fry.</p>

<p class="c001"><span class="pageno" id="Page_278">278</span>“Will you have a sausage, white pussy?” said one
of the Trolls, and threw a red-hot frog right into the
bear’s jaws.</p>

<p class="c001">“Claw and smite Bruin!” said Peer Gynt.</p>

<p class="c001">And then the bear got into such a rage that he
rushed at the Trolls and smote and clawed them
all, and Peer Gynt took the other handspike and
hammered away at them as if he wanted to beat their
brains out. So the Trolls had to clear out, and Peer
stayed and enjoyed himself on the Christmas cheer
the whole feast-time. After that the Trolls were not
heard of again for many years. The farmer had a
light-coloured mare, and Peer advised him to breed
from her, and let her foals in their turn run and
breed among the hills there.</p>

<p class="c001">Many years afterwards, about Christmas-time, the
farmer was out in the forest cutting wood for the
feast-time, when a Troll came towards him and
shouted—</p>

<p class="c001">“Have you got that big white pussy of yours
yet?”</p>

<p class="c001">“Yes, she’s at home behind the stove,” said the
farmer; “and she’s got seven kittens now, much
bigger and fiercer than herself.”</p>

<p class="c001">“We’ll never come to you any more, then,” shouted
the Troll.</p>

<p class="c001">“That Peer Gynt was a strange one,” said Anders.
“He was such an out-and-out tale-maker and yarn-spinner,
you couldn’t have helped laughing at him.
He always made out that he himself had been mixed
up in all the stories that people said had happened in
the olden times.”</p>

<div>
  <span class="pageno" id="Page_279">279</span>
  <h3 class="c021">GUDBRAND GLESNË.</h3>
</div>

<p class="c013">“There was a hunter in the West-Hills,” said
Thor Ulvsvolden, “called Gudbrand Glesnë. He was
married to the grandmother of the lad you saw at the
sæter yesterday evening, and a first-rate hunter they
say he was. One autumn he came across a huge buck.
He shot at it, and from the way it fell he couldn’t
tell but that it was stone dead. So he went up to it,
and, as one often does, seated himself astride on its
back, and was just drawing his knife to cleave the
neck-bone from the skull. But no sooner had he sat
down than up it jumped, threw its horns back, and
jammed him down between them, so that he was fixed
as in an arm-chair. Then it rushed away; for the
bullet had only grazed the beast’s head, so that it had
fallen in a swoon. Never any man had such a ride<a id="r150"></a><a href="#f150" class="c012"><sup>[150]</sup></a> as
that Gudbrand had. Away they went in the teeth of
the wind, over the ugliest glaciers and moraines.
Then the beast dashed along the Gjende-edge; and
now Gudbrand prayed to the Lord, for he thought he
would never see sun or moon again. But at last the
reindeer took to the water and swam straight across
with the hunter on its back. By this time he had got
his knife drawn, and the moment the buck set foot
on shore, he plunged it into its neck, and it dropped
dead. But you may be sure Gudbrand Glesnë
wouldn’t have taken that ride again, not for all the
riches in the world.</p>

<p class="c001">“I have heard a story like that in England, about
a deer-stalker that became a deer-rider,” said Sir
Tottenbroom.<a id="r151"></a><a href="#f151" class="c012"><sup>[151]</sup></a></p>

<p class="c001"><span class="pageno" id="Page_280">280</span>“Bliecher, in Jutland, tells a similar one,” I said.</p>

<p class="c001">“But what sort of a place was this Gjender-edge
you spoke of, Thor?” he interrupted me.</p>

<p class="c001">“Gjende-edge, you mean?” asked Thor. “It’s the
ridge<a id="r152"></a><a href="#f152" class="c012"><sup>[152]</sup></a> of a mountain lying between the Gjende-lakes,
and so horribly narrow and steep that if you stand on
it and drop a stone from each hand, they will roll
down into the lakes, one on each side. The reindeer-hunters
go over it in fine weather, otherwise it’s
impassable; but there was a devil of a fellow up in
Skiager—Ole Storebråten was his name—who went
over it carrying a full-sized reindeer on his shoulders.”</p>

<p class="c001">“How high is it above the lakes?” asked Sir
Tottenbroom.</p>

<p class="c001">“Oh, it’s not nearly so high as the Rondë-hills,”
said Thor. “But it’s over seven hundred ells high.”</p>

<hr class="c017" />
<p class="c001">Footnotes:</p>
<hr class="c018" />
<div class="footnote" id="f147">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r147">147</a>. See footnote, p. <a href="#f17">xxvi</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f148">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r148">148</a>. Literally, “with his tail.” A gun loosely slung over the
shoulder bears a certain resemblance to a tail sticking up in the air.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f149">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r149">149</a>. Literally, “tail.”</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f150">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r150">150</a>. “Skyds”—conveyance.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f151">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r151">151</a>. An English sportsman who accompanied Asbjörnsen on
his rambles.</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="f152">
<p class="c001"><a href="#r152">152</a>. <span lang="no" xml:lang="no" xml:lang="no">“Rygge”</span>—backbone, <span lang="fr" xml:lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><i>arête</i></span>.</p>
</div>
