<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Characters</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Characters</h2>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Åse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> <i>a peasant’s widow</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Peer Gynt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> <i>her son</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Two Old Women <i>with corn-sacks</i>. Aslak, <i>a smith</i>. Wedding Guests. A Kitchen-Master, A Fiddler, etc.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A Man and Wife, <i>newcomers to the district</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Solveig and Little Helga, <i>their daughters</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Farmer at Hegstad.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Ingrid, <i>his daughter</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Bridegroom and His Parents.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Three Sæter-Girls. A Green-Clad Woman.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Old Man of the Dovrë.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A Troll-Courtier. Several Others. Troll-Maidens and Troll-Urchins. A Couple of Witches. Brownies, Nixies, Gnomes, etc.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>An Ugly Brat. A Voice in the Darkness. Bird-Cries.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Kari, <i>a cottar’s wife</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Master Cotton, Monsieur Ballon, Herren Von Eberkopf and Trumpeterstråle, <i>gentlemen on their travels</i>. A Thief and A Receiver.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Anitra, <i>daughter of a Bedouin chief</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Arabs, Female Slaves, Dancing-Girls, etc.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Memnon-Statue (<i>singing</i>). The Sphinx At Gizeh (<i>muta persona</i>).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Professor Begriffenfeldt, Dr. phil., <i>director of the madhouse at Cairo</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Huhu, <i>a language-reformer from the coast of Malabar</i>. Hussein, <i>an eastern Minister</i>. A Fellah, <i>with a royal mummy</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Several Madmen, <i>with their</i> Keepers.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A Norwegian Skipper and His Crew. A Strange Passenger.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A Pastor. A Funeral-Party. A Parish-Officer. A Button-Moulder. A Lean Person.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p>(<i>The action, which opens in the beginning of the present [that is the nineteenth] century, and ends towards our own days [1867], takes place partly in Gudbrandsdale, and on the mountains around it, partly on the coast of Morocco, in the desert of Sahara, in a madhouse at Cairo, at sea, etc.</i>)</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
